my design is to show the manner wherein we perceive by sight the distance, magnitude, and situation of objects. also to consider the difference there is betwixt the ideas of sight and touch, and whether there be any idea common to both senses.
my plan is to show how we perceive by sight the distance, size, and orientation of objects. also to consider the difference between the ideas of sight and those of touch, and whether there's any idea common to both senses.

it is, i think, agreed by all that distance, of itself and immediately, cannot be seen. for distance being a line directed end-wise to the eye, it projects only one point in the fund of the eye, which point remains invariably the same, whether the distance be longer or shorter.
everyone accepts, i think, that distance itself can't be immediately seen. distance is a line directed end-wise to the eye, so it projects only one point onto the fund of the eye, and this point is always the same, whether the distance is longer or shorter.

i find it also acknowledged that the estimate we make of the distance of objects considerably remote is rather an act of judgment grounded on experience than of sense. for example, when i perceive a great number of intermediate objects, such as houses, fields, rivers, and the like, which i have experienced to take up a considerable space, i thence form a judgment or conclusion that the object i see beyond them is at a great distance. again, when an object appears faint and small, which at a near distance i have experienced to make a vigorous and large appearance, i instantly conclude it to be far off: and this, it is evident, is the result of experience; without which, from the faintness and littleness i should not have inferred anything concerning the distance of objects.
i find it also to be generally acknowledged that our estimate of the distance of considerably remote objects is an act of judgment based on experience rather than of sense. when i perceive many intermediate objects houses, fields, rivers, and the like which i have experienced to take up a considerable space, this leads me to judge or conclude that the object i see beyond them is at a great distance. and when an object appears faint and small, though at a near distance i have experienced it to make a vigorous and large appearance, i instantly conclude it to be far off; and this is obviously the result of experience, without which i wouldn't have inferred anything concerning the distance of objects from the faintness and littleness of their appearance.

but when an object is placed at so near a distance as that the interval between the eyes bears any sensible proportion to it, the opinion of speculative men is that the two optic axes (the fancy that we see only with one eye at once being exploded) concurring at the object do there make an angle, by means of which, according as it is greater or lesser, the object is perceived to be nearer or farther off.
but when an object is near enough to me for the distance between my eyes to be a significant proportion of the distance to the object, the theoreticians hold that the two optic axes meeting at the object make an angle by means of which the object is perceived to be nearer or further off depending on the size of that angle.

betwixt which and the foregoing manner of estimating distance there is this remarkable difference: that whereas there was no apparent, necessary connection between small distance and a large and strong appearance, or between great distance and a little and faint appearance, there appears a very necessary connection between an obtuse angle and near distance, and an acute angle and farther distance. it does not in the least depend upon experience, but may be evidently known by anyone before he had experienced it, that the nearer the concurrence of the optic axes, the greater the angle, and the remoter their concurrence is, the lesser will be the angle comprehended by them.
there's a remarkable difference between these two ways of estimating distance: whereas there appears to be no necessary connection between small distance and a large strong appearance, or between large distance and a small faint appearance, there appears to be a very necessary connection between an obtuse angle and near distance, and an acute angle and further distance. the latter doesn't in the least depend on experience; someone with no experience of this can know for sure that the nearer the meeting-point of the optic axes the larger the angle, and the remoter their meeting-point is, the smaller will be the angle that they make.

there is another way mentioned by optic writers, whereby they will have us judge of those distances, in respect of which the breadth of the pupil hath any sensible bigness: and that is the greater or lesser divergency of the rays, which issuing from the visible point do fall on the pupil, that point being judged nearest which is seen by most diverging rays, and that remoter which is seen by less diverging rays: and so on, the apparent distance still increasing, as the divergency of the rays decreases, till at length it becomes infinite, when the rays that fall on the pupil are to sense parallel. and after this manner it is said we perceive distance when we look only with one eye.
writers on optics mention another way in which, they say, we judge of distances that are significantly related to the breadth of the pupil of a single eye. it depends on the larger or lesser divergence of the rays that reach the pupil from the visible point: the more (or less) the rays diverge, the nearer (or further) the point is judged to be. as the divergence of the rays decreases until they are to sense parallel, the apparent distance increases until it becomes infinite. this, it is said, is how we perceive distance when we look with only one eye.

in this case also it is plain we are not beholding to experience: it being a certain, necessary truth that the nearer the direct rays falling on the eye approach to a parallelism, the farther off is the point of their intersection, or the visible point from whence they flow.
it's clear that here again we are not relying on experience. it is a certain, necessary truth that the nearer the direct rays falling on the eye approach to being parallel the further away is the point of their intersection, i.e. the visible point from which they flow.

i have here set down the common, current accounts that are given of our perceiving near distances by sight, which, though they are unquestionably received for true by mathematicians, and accordingly made use of by them in determining the apparent places of objects, do, nevertheless seem to me very unsatisfactory: and that for these following reasons:
the accounts given in 4 and 6 of perceiving near distance by sight are accepted as true and accordingly used in determining the apparent places of objects; but they seem very unsatisfactory, for the following reasons.

first, it is evident that when the mind perceives any idea, not immediately and of itself, it must be by the means of some other idea. thus, for instance, the passions which are in the mind of another are of themselves to me invisible. i may nevertheless perceive them by sight, though not immediately, yet by means of the colours they produce in the countenance. we often see shame or fear in the looks of a man, by perceiving the changes of his countenance to red or pale.
it is evident that when the mind perceives an idea other than immediately and of itself, it must be by means of some other idea. the passions in your mind are of themselves invisible to me; but i can perceive them by sight, though not immediately, by means of the colours they produce in your face. we often see shame or fear in the looks of a man by perceiving the changes of his face to red or pale.

moreover it is evident that no idea which is not itself perceived can be the means of perceiving any other idea. if i do not perceive the redness or paleness of a man's face themselves, it is impossible i should perceive by them the passions which are in his mind.
it is also evident that an idea that isn't itself perceived can't be the means of perceiving any other idea. if i don't perceive the redness or paleness of a man's face themselves, i can't perceive by them the passions in his mind.

now from sect. 2 it is plain that distance is in its own nature imperceptible, and yet it is perceived by sight. it remains, therefore, that it be brought into view by means of some other idea that is itself immediately perceived in the act of vision.
now from 2 it is plain that distance is in its own nature imperceptible, and yet it is perceived by sight. so it must be brought into view by means of some other idea that is itself immediately perceived in the act of vision.

but those lines and angles, by means whereof some mathematicians pretend to explain the perception of distance, are themselves not at all perceived, nor are they in truth ever thought of by those unskilful in optics. i appeal to anyone's experience whether upon sight of an object he computes its distance by the bigness of the angle made by the meeting of the two optic axes? or whether he ever thinks of the greater or lesser divergency of the rays, which arrive from any point to his pupil? everyone is himself the best judge of what he perceives, and what not. in vain shall all the mathematicians in the world tell me, that i perceive certain lines and angles which introduce into my mind the various ideas of distance, so long as i myself am conscious of no such thing.
but those lines and angles through which some men claim to explain the perception of distance are not themselves perceived at all, and by people unskilful in optics they're never even thought about. i appeal to your experience: do you ever, when seeing an object, compute its distance by the size of the angle made by the meeting of the two optic axes? and do you ever think about the larger or lesser divergence of the rays that arrive from any point to your pupil? everyone is himself the best judge of what he perceives and what he doesn't. it's no use telling me that i perceive certain lines and angles which introduce into my mind the various ideas of distance if i myself am conscious of no such thing!

since, therefore, those angles and lines are not themselves perceived by sight, it follows from sect. 10 that the mind doth not by them judge of the distance of objects.
thus, since those angles and lines are not themselves perceived by sight, it follows from 10 that the mind doesn't judge the distance of objects on the basis of them.

secondly, the truth of this assertion will be yet farther evident to anyone that considers those lines and angles have no real existence in nature, being only an hypothesis framed by the mathematicians, and by them introduced into optics, that they might treat of that science in a geometrical way.
the truth of this will be even more evident to anyone who bears in mind that those lines and angles have no real existence in nature, being only an hypothesis that the mathematicians formed and then introduced into optics so as to treat that science in a geometrical way.

the third and last reason i shall give for rejecting that doctrine is, that though we should grant the real existence of those optic angles, etc., and that it was possible for the mind to perceive them, yet these principles would not be found sufficient to explain the phenomena of distance, as shall be shown hereafter.
the last reason i shall give for rejecting that doctrine is that even if we granted the real existence of those optic angles etc., and even if the mind could perceive them, these principles still wouldn't be sufficient to explain the phenomena of distance. i'll show this in due course.

now, it being already shown that distance is suggested to the mind by the mediation of some other idea which is itself perceived in the act of seeing, it remains that we inquire what ideas or sensations there be that attend vision, unto which we may suppose the ideas of distance are connected, and by which they are introduced into the mind. and first, it is certain by experience that when we look at a near object with both eyes, according as it approaches or recedes from us, we alter the disposition of our eyes, by lessening or widening the interval between the pupils. this disposition or turn of the eyes is attended with a sensation, which seems to me to be that which in this case brings the idea of greater or lesser distance into the mind.
now, we know that distance is suggested to the mind by the mediation of some other idea that is itself perceived in the act of seeing; so now we should inquire into what ideas or sensations there are that accompany vision and may be connected with the ideas of distance in such a way as to introduce the latter into the mind. well, firstly, experience shows us that when we look at a near object with both eyes, as it approaches or recedes from us we lessen or widen the interval between the pupils of our eyes. this turn of the eyes is accompanied by a sensation, which seems to me to be what brings the idea of larger or lesser distance into the mind in this case.

not that there is any natural or necessary connection between the sensation we perceive by the turn of the eyes and greater or lesser distance, but because the mind has by constant experience found the different sensations corresponding to the different dispositions of the eyes to be attended each with a different degree of distance in the object: there has grown an habitual or customary connection between those two sorts of ideas, so that the mind no sooner perceives the sensation arising from the different turn it gives the eyes, in order to bring the pupils nearer or farther asunder, but it withal perceives the different idea of distance which was wont to be connected with that sensation; just as upon hearing a certain sound, the idea is immediately suggested to the understanding which custom had united with it.
not because there's any natural or necessary connection between the sensation we perceive by the turn of the eyes and larger or lesser distance; but because the mind has constantly experienced the different sensations corresponding to the different dispositions of the eyes each to be accompanied by a different distance to the object, there has come to be an habitual or customary connection between those two sorts of ideas, so that as soon as the mind perceives the sensation arising from its turn of the eyes to bring the pupils nearer or further apart but it immediately perceives the idea of distance that has customarily been connected with that sensation just as on hearing a certain sound the idea that custom has united with it is immediately suggested to the understanding.

nor do i see how i can easily be mistaken in this matter. i know evidently that distance is not perceived of itself. that by consequence it must be perceived by means of some other idea which is immediately perceived, and varies with the different degrees of distance. i know also that the sensation arising from the turn of the eyes is of itself immediately perceived, and various degrees thereof are connected with different distances, which never fail to accompany them into my mind, when i view an object distinctly with both eyes, whose distance is so small that in respect of it the interval between the eyes has any considerable magnitude.
i don't see how i can easily be mistaken about this. i know for sure that distance is not perceived of itself, and that therefore it must be perceived by means of some other idea that is immediately perceived and varies with the distance. i know also that the sensation arising from the turn of the eyes is immediately perceived, and its various degrees are connected with different distances that always accompany them into my mind when i view distinctly with both eyes an object whose distance is small enough for the interval between my eyes to be significant in proportion to it.

i know it is a received opinion that by altering the disposition of the eyes the mind perceives whether the angle of the optic axes is made greater or lesser. and that accordingly by a kind of natural geometry it judges the point of their intersection to be nearer or farther off. but that this is not true i am convinced by my own experience, since i am not conscious that i make any such use of the perception i have by the turn of my eyes. and for me to make those judgments, and draw those conclusions from it, without knowing that i do so, seems altogether incomprehensible.
i know it is generally thought that by altering the disposition of the eyes the mind perceives whether the angle of the optic axes is larger or lesser, and that accordingly by a kind of natural geometry it judges the point of their intersection to be nearer or further away. but my own experience convinces me that that this is not true; i am not conscious of making any such use of the perception i have by the turn of my eyes; and it seems altogether incomprehensible that i should make those judgments and draw those conclusions without knowing that i'm doing so.

from all which it follows that the judgment we make of the distance of an object, viewed with both eyes, is entirely the result of experience. if we had not constantly found certain sensations arising from the various disposition of the eyes, attended with certain degrees of distance, we should never make those sudden judgments from them concerning the distance of objects; no more than we would pretend to judge a man's thoughts by his pronouncing words we had never heard before.
from all this it follows that our judgment of the distance of an object viewed with both eyes is entirely the result of experience. if we hadn't constantly found certain sensations arising from the various disposition of the eyes to be accompanied by certain distances, we would never make those sudden judgments from them concerning the distance of objects; any more than we would claim to judge a man's thoughts by his pronouncing words we had never heard before.

secondly, an object placed at a certain distance from the eye, to which the breadth of the pupil bears a considerable proportion, being made to approach, is seen more confusedly: and the nearer it is brought the more confused appearance it makes. and this being found constantly to be so, there ariseth in the mind an habitual connection between the several degrees of confusion and distance; the greater confusion still implying the lesser distance, and the lesser confusion the greater distance of the object.
secondly, when an object that is quite close to the eye comes closer still it is seen more confusedly; and the nearer it comes the more confused its appearance is. because this is constantly the case, there arises in the mind an habitual connection between degrees of confusion and distance; the larger confusion implying the lesser distance, and the lesser confusion implying the larger distance of the object.

this confused appearance of the object doth therefore seem to be the medium whereby the mind judgeth of distance in those cases wherein the most approved writers of optics will have it judge by the different divergency with which the rays flowing from the radiating point fall on the pupil. no man, i believe, will pretend to see or feel those imaginary angles that the rays are supposed to form according to their various inclinations on his eye. but he cannot choose seeing whether the object appear more or less confused. it is therefore a manifest consequence from what bath been demonstrated, that instead of the greater or lesser divergency of the rays, the mind makes use of the greater or lesser confusedness of the appearance, thereby to determine the apparent place of an object.
so this confused appearance of the object seems to be the medium whereby the mind judges distance in those cases wherein the most approved writers of optics think it judges by the divergence with which the rays flowing from the radiating point fall on the pupil. no man, i believe, will claim to see or feel those imaginary angles that the rays are supposed to form at the surface of his eye. but he does see he can't help seeing whether the object appears more or less confused.

nor doth it avail to say there is not any necessary connection between confused vision and distance, great or small. for i ask any man what necessary connection he sees between the redness of a blush and shame? and yet no sooner shall he behold that colour to arise in the face of another, but it brings into his and the idea of that passion which hath been observed to accompany it.
i agree that there's no necessary connection between confused vision and distance; but then what necessary connection is there between the redness of a blush and shame? yet whenever we see that colour arise in someone's face it brings into our mind the idea of the passion that has been observed to accompany it.

what seems to have misled the writers of optics in this matter is that they imagine men judge of distance as they do of a conclusion in mathematics, betwixt which and the premises it is indeed absolutely requisite there be an apparent, necessary connection: but it is far otherwise in the sudden judgments men make of distance. we are not to think that brutes and children, or even grown reasonable men, whenever they perceive an object to approach, or depart from them, do it by virtue of geometry and demonstration.
what seems to have misled the writers of optics in this matter is that they imagine men judge distance in the way they judge an inference in mathematics. for that it is indeed absolutely required that there be an evident necessary connection; but men's sudden judgments about distance are nothing like that. we are not to think that non-human animals and children, or even adult reasonable men, whenever they perceive an object to be approaching or retreating do it by virtue of geometry and demonstration.

that one idea may suggest another to the mind it will suffice that they have been observed to go together, without any demonstration of the necessity of their coexistence, or without so much as knowing what it is that makes them so to coexist. of this there are innumerable instances of which no one can be ignorant.
for one idea to suggest another to the mind all that is needed is for them to have been observed to go together, without any demonstration of the necessity of their coexistence, and without even knowing why they coexist. of this there are innumerable instances of which no-one can be ignorant.

thus, greater confusion having been constantly attended with nearer distance, no sooner is the former idea perceived, but it suggests the latter to our thoughts. and if it had been the ordinary course of nature that the farther off an object were placed, the more confused it should appear, it is certain the very same perception that now makes us think an object approaches would then have made us to imagine it went farther off. that perception, abstracting from custom and experience, being equally fitted to produce the idea of great distance, or small distance, or no distance at all.
thus, larger confusion having been constantly accompanied by nearer distance, the moment the former is perceived it suggests the latter to our thoughts. and if it had been the ordinary course of nature that the further off an object was the more confused it appeared, it's certain the perception that now makes us think an object is approaching would have made us think it was retreating; because that perception of confusion abstracting from custom and experience is equally fitted to produce the idea of great distance, or small distance, or no distance at all.

thirdly, an object being placed at the distance above specified, and brought nearer to the eye, we may nevertheless prevent, at least for some time, the appearances growing more confused, by straining the eye. in which case that sensation supplies the place of confused vision in aiding the mind to judge of the distance of the object; it being esteemed so much the nearer by how much the effort or straining of the eye in order to distinct vision is greater.
thirdly, when an object that is fairly near to the eye is brought still nearer, we can at least for some time prevent the appearance's growing more confused, by straining the eye. in this case the sensation of straining the eye takes the place of confused vision in aiding the mind to judge the distance of the object.

i have here set down those sensations or ideas that seem to be the constant and general occasions of introducing into the mind the different ideas of near distance. it is true in most cases that divers other circumstances contribute to frame our idea of distance, to wit, the particular number, size, kind, etc., of the things seen. concerning which, as well as all other the forementioned occasions which suggest distance, i shall only observe they have none of them, in their own nature, any relation or connection with it: nor is it possible they should ever signify the various degrees thereof, otherwise than as by experience they have been found to be connected with them.
i have listed the sensations or ideas that seem to be the constant and general occasions of introducing into the mind the different ideas of near distance. it's true that in most cases various other circumstances also contribute to forming our idea of distance, namely the particular number, size, kind, etc. of the things seen. concerning these i shall merely remark that none of them has in its own nature any relation or connection with distance, and that they couldn't possibly signify different distances unless they were found by experience to be connected with them.

i shall proceed upon these principles to account for a phenomenon which has hitherto strangely puzzled the writers of optics, and is so far from being accounted for by any of their theories of vision that it is, by their own confession, plainly repugnant to them; and of consequence, if nothing else could be objected, were alone sufficient to bring their credit in question. the whole difficulty i shall lay before you in the words of the learned dr. barrow, with which he concludes his optic lectures:
i shall now use these principles to account for a phenomenon that has until now vastly puzzled the writers on optics, and is so far from being explained by any of their theories of vision that it is as they admit clearly in conflict with them. even if there were no other objections to their theories, this alone would be sufficient to call them into question. i shall lay the whole difficulty before you in the words of the learned dr barrow, with which he concludes his lectures on optics.

this case is much the same as if we should suppose an englishman to meet a foreigner who used the same words with the english, but in a direct contrary signification. the englishman would not fail to make a wrong judgment of the ideas annexed to those sounds in the mind of him that used them. just so, in the present case the object speaks (if i may so say) with words that the eye is well acquainted with, that is, confusions of appearance; but whereas heretofore the greater confusions were always wont to signify nearer distances, they have in this case a direct, contrary signification, being connected with the greater distances. whence it follows that the eye must unavoidably be mistaken, since it will take the confusions in the sense it has been used to, which is directly opposed to the true.
this case is like the situation where an englishman meets a foreigner who uses english words with directly opposite meanings. the englishman would be bound to make wrong judgments about what ideas were annexed to those sounds in the foreigner's mind. similarly in the present case: the object speaks (if i may put it like that) with words that the eye is well acquainted with, namely confusions of appearance; but whereas until now the greater confusions always signified nearer distances, they have in this case a directly opposite signification, being connected with the larger distances. so the eye will inevitably be mistaken, understanding the confusions in the sense it has been used to, which is directly opposed to the true one.

this phenomenon as it entirely subverts the opinion of those who will have us judge of distance by lines and angles, on which supposition it is altogether inexplicable, so it seems to me no small confirmation of the truth of that principle whereby it is explained. but in order co a more full explication of this point, and to show how far the hypothesis of the mind's judging by the various divergency of rays may be of use in determining the apparent place of an object, it will be necessary to premise some few things, which are already well known to those who have any skill in dioptrics.
this phenomenon entirely subverts the opinion that we judge distances by lines and angles, on which supposition it is inexplicable; and it strikes me as strong confirmation of the truth of the principle by which is explained. but to develop this point more fully, and to show how far determining the apparent place of an object is helped by the hypothesis that the mind judges by the divergence of rays, i need first to premise a few things that those who are skilled in dioptrics already know.

first, any radiating point is then distinctly seen when the rays proceeding from it are, by the refractive power of the crystalline, accurately reunited in the retina or fund of the eye: but if they are reunited, either before they arrive at the retina, or after they have passed it, then there is confused vision.
any radiating point is distinctly seen when the rays proceeding from it are accurately reunited in the retina by the refractive power of the lens. if they are reunited before reaching the retina or after passing it, there is confused vision.

secondly, suppose in the adjacent figures np represent an eye duly framed and retaining its natural figure. in fig. 1 the rays falling nearly parallel on the eye, are by the crystalline ab refracted, so as their focus or point of union f falls exactly on the retina: but if the rays fall sensibly diverging on the eye, as in fig. 2, then their focus falls beyond the retina: or if the rays are made to converge by the lens qs before they come at the eye, as in fig. 3, their focus f will fall before the retina. in which two last cases it is evident from the foregoing section that the appearance of the point z is confused. and by how much the greater is the convergency, or divergency, of the rays falling on the pupil, by so much the farther will the point of their reunion be from the retina, either before or behind it, and consequently the point z will appear by so much the more confused. and this, by the bye, may show us the difference between confused and faint vision. confused vision is when the rays proceedings from each distinct point of the object are not accurately recollected in one corresponding point on the retina, but take up some space thereon, so that rays from different points become mixed and confused together. this is opposed to a distinct vision, and attends near objects. faint vision is when by reason of the distance of the object or grossness of the interjacent medium few rays arrive from the object to the eye. this is opposed to vigorous or clear vision, and attends remote objects. but to return.
in the three diagrams on the right, take np to represent an eye in good condition and retaining its natural shape. in figure 1, the rays falling nearly parallel on the eye are refracted by the lens ab so that their focus or point of union f falls exactly on the retina. in figure 2 the rays are diverging as they fall on the eye, so that their focus f falls beyond the retina. in figure 3 the rays are made to converge by the glass lens qs before they reach the eye, so that their focus f will fall before they reach the retina. it is evident from 34 that in 2 and 3 the appearance of the point z will be confused. and the larger the divergence (or convergence) of the rays falling on the pupil, the further their point of reunion f will be behind (or before) the retina, and consequently the more confused point z will appear. this, by the way, shows the difference between confused and faint vision. vision is confused when the rays from each point of the object are not accurately re-collected in one corresponding point on the retina, but spread across some space on it so that rays from different points become mixed and confused together. this is opposed to distinct vision, and comes with near objects. vision is faint when, because of the distance of the object or the cloudiness of the intervening medium, few rays get from the object to the eye. this is opposed to vigorous or clear vision, and comes with remote objects. now back to the main thread.

the eye, or (to speak truly) the mind, perceiving only the confusion itself, without ever considering the cause from which it proceeds, doth constantly annex the same degree of distance to the same degree of confusion. whether that confusion be occasioned by converging or by diverging rays, it matters not. whence it follows that the eye viewing the object z through the glass qs (which by refraction causeth the rays zq, zs, etc., to converge) should judge it to be at such a nearness at which if it were placed it would radiate on the eye with rays diverging to that degree as would produce the same confusion which is now produced by converging rays, i.e. would cover a portion of the retina equal to dc (vid. fig. 3 supra). but then this must be understood (to use dr. barrow's phrase) seclusis praenotionibus et praejudiciis, in case we abstract from all other circumstances of vision, such as the figure, size, faintness, etc. of the visible objects; all which do ordinarily concur to form our idea of distance, the mind having by frequent experience observed their several sorts or degrees to be connected with various distances.
the mind perceives only the confusion itself, without ever considering the cause of it; so it constantly annexes the same distance to the same degree of confusion. whether the confusion comes from converging or diverging rays doesn't matter. it follows (in the figure 3 case) that the eye, viewing the object z through the glass qs (which by refraction causes the rays zq, zs, etc. to converge), should judge z to be at a distance such that if it were placed there it would send to the eye rays diverging to a degree that would produce the same confusion which is now produced by converging rays, i.e. would cover a portion of the retina equal to dc. but this must be understood as abstracting from all other circumstances of vision, such as the shape, size, faintness, etc. of the visible objects, all of which do ordinarily contribute to our idea of distance because the mind has by frequent experience observed their various sorts or degrees to be connected with various distances.

it plainly follows from what hath been said that a person perfectly purblind (i.e. that could not see an object distinctly but when placed close to his eye) would not make the same wrong judgment that others do in the forementioned case. for to him greater confusions constantly suggesting greater distances, he must, as he recedes from the glass and the object grows more confused, judge it to be at a farther distance, contrary to what they do who have had the perception of the objects growing more confused connected with the idea of approach.
i plainly follows from this that a person who couldn't see things distinctly unless they were close to his eye would not make the same wrong judgment that others do in this case. to him larger confusions will always suggest larger distances; so as he recedes from the glass and the object grows more confused, he must judge it to be further away; unlike those for whom the perception of the object's growing more confused is connected with the idea of approach.

hence also it doth appear there may be good use of computation by lines and angles in optics; not that the mind judgeth of distance immediately by them, but because it judgeth by somewhat which is connected with them, and to the determination whereof they may be subservient. thus the mind judging of the distance of an object by the confusedness of its appearance, and this confusedness being greater or lesser to the naked eye, according as the object is seen by rays more or less diverging, it follows that a man may make use of the divergency of the rays in computing the apparent distance, though not for its own sake, yet on account of the confusion with which it is connected. but, so it is, the confusion itself is entirely neglected by mathematicians as having no necessary relation with distance, such as the greater or lesser angles of divergency are conceived to have. and these (especially for that they fall under mathematical computation) are alone regarded in determining the apparent places of objects, as though they were the sole and immediate cause of the judgments the mind makes of distance. whereas, in truth, they should not at all be regarded in themselves, or any otherwise, than as they are supposed to be the cause of confused vision.
we also see here that there may be good use of computation by lines and angles in optics; not because the mind judges distances immediately by them, but because it judges by something that is connected with them, and they can help in determining that something. the mind judges the distance of an object by the confusedness of its appearance, and this confusedness is greater or lesser to the naked eye according to whether the object is seen by rays more or less diverging. so a man can make use of the divergence of the rays in computing the apparent distance not for its own sake but on account of the confusion with which it is connected. but the mathematicians entirely neglect the confusion itself, because it doesn't have the necessary relation with distance that angles of divergence are thought to have. these angles (especially because they can be dealt with mathematically) are treated as the only things that matter in determining the apparent places of objects, as though they were the sole and immediate cause of the mind's judgments about distance. whereas in truth they shouldn't be accorded any importance except as the cause of confused vision.

the not considering of this has been a fundamental and perplexing oversight. for proof whereof we need go no farther than the case before us. it having been observed that the most diverging rays brought into the mind the idea of nearest distance, and that still, as the divergency decreased, the distance increased: and it being thought the connexion between the various degrees of divergency and distance was immediate; this naturally leads one to conclude, from an ill-grounded analogy, that converging rays shall make an object appear at an immense distance: and that, as the convergency increases, the distance (if it were possible) should do so likewise. that this was the cause of dr. barrow's mistake is evident from his own words which we have quoted. whereas had the learned doctor observed that diverging and converging rays, how opposite soever they may seem, do nevertheless agree in producing the same effect, to wit, confusedness of vision, greater degrees whereof are produced indifferently, either as the divergency or convergency and the rays increaseth. and that it is by this effect, which is the same in both, that either the divergency or convergency is perceived by the eye; i say, had he but considered this, it is certain he would have made a quite contrary judgment, and rightly concluded that those rays which fall on the eye with greater degrees of convergency should make the object from whence they proceed appear by so much the nearer. but it is plain it was impossible for any man to attain to a right notion of this matter so long as he had regard only to lines and angles, and did not apprehend the true nature of vision, and how far it was of mathematical consideration.
not considering this has been a fundamental and problem-creating oversight, for proof of which we need only look at the case before us. the problem arose for people who have observed that the most divergent rays bring into the mind the idea of nearest distance, and that as the divergence decreases the distance increases; and who think that the connection between the various degrees of divergence and distance is immediate; which naturally led them to conclude, from an ill grounded analogy, that converging rays will make an object appear at an immense distance, and that as the convergence increases the distance (if it were possible) should also increase. that this was the cause of dr barrow's mistake is evident from his own words which i have quoted. if the learned doctor had observed that diverging and converging rays, however opposite they may seem, produce the same effect, namely confusedness of vision; and that it is by this effect, which is the same in both, that either the divergence or convergence is perceived by the eye, he would have made a quite contrary judgment, and rightly concluded that the rays that fall on the eye with greater convergence should make the object from which they come appear so much the nearer. but clearly no man could have a right notion of this matter so long as he attended only to lines and angles and did not apprehend the true nature of vision and how far it was of mathematical consideration.

from what hath been premised it is a manifest consequence that a man born blind, being made to see, would, at first, have no idea of distance by sight; the sun and stars, the remotest objects as well as the nearer, would all seem to be in his eye, or rather in his mind. the objects intromitted by sight would seem to him (as in truth they are) no other than a new set of thoughts or sensations, each whereof is as near to him as the perceptions of pain or pleasure, or the most inward passions of his soul. for our judging objects provided by sight to be at any distance, or without the mind, is (vid. sect. 28) entirely the effect of experience, which one in those circumstances could not yet have attained to.
from what i have maintained it clearly follows that if a man who had been born blind were made to see, he would at first have no idea of distance by sight; the sun and stars, the remotest objects as well as the nearer ones, would all seem to be in his eye, or rather in his mind. the objects brought to him by sight would seem to him to be (as in truth they are) nothing but a new set of thoughts or sensations, each as near to him as the perceptions of pain or pleasure or the most inward passions of his soul. when we judge any object perceived by sight to be at a distance from us, i.e. outside the mind, this is (see 28) entirely the effect of experience, which our man born blind couldn't yet have attained to.

it is indeed otherwise upon the common supposition that men judge of distance by the angle of the optic axes, just as one in the dark, or a blind-man by the angle comprehended by two sticks, one whereof he held in each hand. for if this were true, it would follow that one blind from his birth being made to see, should stand in need of no new experience in order to perceive distance by sight. but that this is false has, i think, been sufficiently demonstrated.
that is not how things are according to the common supposition that men judge distance by the angle of the optic axes, in the way a blind man or someone in the dark could judge a distance by the angle made by two sticks of which he had one in each hand. if that were right, a congenitally blind person who was made to see could perceive distance by sight without help from any new experience. i think i have sufficiently demonstrated that this is false.

and perhaps upon a strict inquiry we shall not find that even those who from their birth have grown up in a continued habit of seeing are irrecoverably prejudiced on the other side, to wit, in thinking what they see to be at a distance from them. for at this time it seems agreed on all hands, by those who have had any thoughts of that matter, that colours, which are the proper and immediate object of sight, are not without the mind. but then it will be said, by sight we have also the ideas of extension, and figure, and motion; all which may well be thought without, and at some distance from the mind, though colour should not. in answer to this i appeal to any man's experience, whether the visible extension of any object doth not appear as near to him as the colour of that object; nay, whether they do not both seem to be in the very same place. is not the extension we see coloured, and is it possible for us, so much as in thought, to separate and abstract colour from extension? now, where the extension is there surely is the figure, and there the motion too. i speak of those which are perceived by sight.
and perhaps upon a strict inquiry we'll find that even normally sighted people are irrecoverably prejudiced on the other side, namely in thinking that what they see is at a distance from them. it seems these days to be agreed on all hands by those who have any thoughts about this that colours, which are the proper and immediate object of sight, are not outside the mind. but then this will be said: by sight we have also the ideas of extension, shape and motion; all of which are outside the mind, and at some distance from it, even though colour is not. in answer to this i appeal to your experience: doesn't the visible extension of any object appear as near to you as that object's colour? don't they indeed seem to be in the very same place? isn't the extension we see coloured? can we even make sense of colour separated and abstracted from extension? and where the extension is, that is surely the place of the shape and of the motion. i'm speaking only of those that are perceived by sight.

but for a fuller explication of this point, and to show that the immediate objects of sight are not so much as the ideas or resemblances of things placed at a distance, it is requisite that we look nearer into the matter and carefully observe what is meant in common discourse, when one says that which he sees is at a distance from him. suppose, for example, that looking at the moon i should say it were fifty or sixty semidiameters of the earth distant from me. let us see what moon this is spoken of: it is plain it cannot be the visible moon, or anything like the visible moon, or that which i see, which is only a round, luminous plane of about thirty visible points in diameter. for in case i am carried from the place where i stand directly towards the moon, it is manifest the object varies, still as i go on; and by the time that i am advanced fifty or sixty semidiameters of the earth, i shall be so far from being near a small, round, luminous flat that i shall perceive nothing like it; this object having long since disappeared, and if i would recover it, it must be by going back to the earth from whence i set out. again, suppose i perceive by sight the faint and obscure idea of something which i doubt whether it be a man, or a tree, or a tower, but judge it to be at the distance of about a mile. it is plain i cannot mean that what i see is a mile off, or that it is the image or likeness of anything which is a mile off, since that every step i take towards it the appearance alters, and from being obscure, small, and faint, grows clear, large, and vigorous. and when i come to the mile's end, that which i saw first is quite lost, neither do i find anything in the likeness of it.
but for a fuller explanation of this point, and to show that the immediate objects of sight are not even the ideas or resemblances of things placed at a distance, we must look more closely into the matter, and take careful note of what is meant by an ordinary speaker who says that what he sees is at a distance from him. here is an example: looking at the moon, i say that it is 50 or 60 semidiameters of the earth distant from me. what moon am i speaking of here? clearly it can't be the visible moon or anything like the visible moon i.e. that which i see because that is only a round, luminous plane of about 30 visible points in diameter. suppose from the place where i am standing i am taken directly towards the moon; it's obvious that the object will keep varying as i go, and by the time i have gone 50 or 60 semi-diameters of the earth i shan't be near to a small, round, luminous plane indeed i'll perceive nothing like it. that object will have long since disappeared, and if i wanted to recover it i would have to go back to the earth from which i set out. or suppose i perceive by sight the faint and obscure idea of something of which i'm not sure whether it is a man or a tree or a tower, but which i judge to be about a mile away. clearly this can't mean that what i see is a mile away, or that it is the image or likeness of anything that is a mile away, because with every step i take towards it the appearance alters, and from being obscure, small, and faint it grows clear, large, and vigorous. when i come to the mile's end, what i saw first is quite lost, and i don't find anything like it.

in these and the like instances the truth of the matter stands thus: having of a long time experienced certain ideas, perceivable by touch, as distance, tangible figure, and solidity, to have been connected with certain ideas of sight, i do upon perceiving these ideas of sight forthwith conclude what tangible ideas are, by the wonted ordinary course of nature like to follow. looking at an object i perceive a certain visible figure and colour, with some degree of faintness and other circumstances, which from what i have formerly observed, determine me to think that if i advance forward so many paces or miles, i shall be affected with such and such ideas of touch: so that in truth and strictness of speech i neither see distance itself, nor anything that i take to be at a distance. i say, neither distance nor things placed at a distance are themselves, or their ideas, truly perceived by sight. this i am persuaded of, as to what concerns myself: and i believe whoever will look narrowly into his own thoughts and examine what he means by saying he sees this or that thing at a distance, will agree with me that what he sees only suggests to his understanding that after having passed a certain distance, to be measured by the motion of his body, which is perceivable by touch, he shall come to perceive such and such tangible ideas which have been usually connected with such and such visible ideas. but that one might be deceived by these suggestions of sense, and that there is no necessary connexion between visible and tangible ideas suggested by them, we need go no farther than the next looking-glass or pictures to be convinced. note that when i speak of tangible ideas, i take the word idea for any the immediate object of sense or understanding, in which large signification it is commonly used by the moderns.
in cases like this the truth of the matter stands thus: having for a long time experienced certain ideas perceivable by touch such as distance, tangible shape, and solidity to have been connected with certain ideas of sight, when i perceive these ideas of sight i immediately conclude what tangible ideas are likely to follow in the ordinary course of nature. looking at an object, i perceive a certain visible shape and colour, with some degree of faintness and other details, and all this leads me to think, on the basis of what i have formerly observed, that if i move forward so many paces or miles i'll be affected with such-and-such ideas of touch; so that very strictly speaking i don't see distance itself or anything that i take to be at a distance. neither distance nor distant things are truly perceived by sight; nor are their ideas. i'm sure of this as applied to myself; and i believe that if you look narrowly into your own thoughts, and examine what you mean by saying i see that thing at a distance, you will agree with me that what you see only suggests to your understanding that after having gone a certain distance (to be measured by the motion of your body, which is perceivable by touch) you will come to perceive such-and-such tangible ideas that have usually been connected with such-and-such visible ideas. one might be deceived by these suggestions of sense; there's no necessary connection between visible ideas and the tangible ideas suggested by them; to be convinced of this, look at a picture or into a mirror. note that when i speak of tangible ideas, i am using idea to stand for any immediate object of sense or understanding, this being the broad meaning it is commonly given by the moderns.

from what we have shown it is a manifest consequence that the ideas of space, outness, and things placed at a distance are not, strictly speaking, the object of sight; they are not otherwise perceived by the eye than by the ear. sitting in my study i hear a coach drive along the street; i look through the casement and see it; i walk out and enter into it; thus, common speech would incline one to think i heard, saw, and touched the same thing, to wit, the coach. it is nevertheless certain, the ideas intromitted by each sense are widely different and distinct from each other; but having been observed constantly to go together, they are spoken of as one and the same thing. by the variation of the noise i perceive the different distances of the coach, and know that it approaches before i look out. thus by the ear i perceive distance, just after the same manner as i do by the eye.
from what i have shown it clearly follows that the ideas of space, outness, and things placed at a distance are not strictly speaking objects of sight; they aren't perceived by the eye any more than they are perceived by the ear. sitting in my study i hear a coach drive along the street; i look through the window and see it; i go outside and and enter into it; thus common speech would incline one to think that i heard, saw, and touched the same thing, namely the coach. but it's certain that the ideas presented by the three senses are widely different and distinct from each other; but because they have been observed constantly to go together they are spoken of as one and the same thing. by the variation of the noise i perceive the different distances of the coach, and know that it is approaching before i look out. thus i perceive distance by the ear in just the same way as i do by the eye.

i do not nevertheless say i hear distance in like manner as i say that i see it, the ideas perceived by hearing not being so apt to be confounded with the ideas of touch as those of sight are. so likewise a man is easily convinced that bodies and external things are not properly the object of hearing; but only sounds, by the mediation whereof the idea of this or that body or distance is suggested to his thoughts. but then one is with more difficulty brought to discern the difference there is betwixt the ideas of sight and touch: though it be certain a man no more sees and feels the same thing than he hears and feels the same thing.
still, i don't say i hear distance in same way that i say i see distance; because the ideas perceived by hearing are not so apt to be confused with the ideas of touch as those of sight are; so a man is easily convinced that what he hears are not really bodies and external things but only sounds which suggest to his thoughts the idea of this or that body or distance. it is harder to get him to discern how the ideas of sight differ from the ideas of touch; though it's certain that a man no more sees and feels the same thing than he hears and feels the same thing.

one reason of which seems to be this. it is thought a great absurdity to imagine that one and the same thing should have any more than one extension, and one figure. but the extension and figure of a body, being let into the mind two ways, and that indifferently either by sight or touch, it seems to follow that we see the same extension and the same figure which we feel.
one reason why this is so seems to be as follows. it is thought a great absurdity to imagine that one thing should have more than one extension and one shape. but because the extension and shape of a body can be into the mind in two equally good ways, by sight and by touch, it seems to follow that we see the same extension and the same shape that we feel.

but if we take a close and accurate view of things, it must be acknowledged that we never see and feel one and the same object. that which is seen is one thing, and that which is felt is another. if the visible figure and extension be not the same with the tangible figure and extension, we are not to infer that one and the same thing has divers extensions. the true consequence is that the objects of sight and touch are two distinct things. it may perhaps require some thought rightly to conceive this distinction. and the difficulty seems not a little increased, because the combination of visible ideas hath constantly the same name as the combination of tangible ideas wherewith it is connected: which doth of necessity arise from the use and end of language.
but if we take a close and accurate view of things we'll have to acknowledge that we never see and feel one and the same object. what is seen is one thing, and what is felt is another; if the visible shape and extension are not the same as the tangible shape and extension, we're not to infer that a single thing has more than one extension. the true consequence is that the objects of sight and touch are two distinct things. it may require some thought rightly to conceive this distinction; and it is made harder by the fact that each cluster of visible ideas has the same name as the cluster of tangible ideas that it is connected with, this being an inevitable upshot of the use and end of language.

in order therefore to treat accurately and unconfusedly of vision, we must bear in mind that there are two sorts of objects apprehended by the eye, the one primarily and immediately, the other secondarily and by intervention of the former. those of the first sort neither are, nor appear to be, without the mind, or at any distance off; they may indeed grow greater or smaller, more confused, or more clear, or more faint, but they do not, cannot approach or recede from us. whenever we say an object is at a distance, whenever we say it draws near, or goes farther off, we must always mean it of the latter sort, which properly belong to the touch, and are not so truly perceived as suggested by the eye in like manner as thoughts by the ear.
thus, if we are to treat vision accurately and unconfusedly, we must bear in mind that two sorts of objects are apprehended by the eye (1) one primarily and immediately, (2) the other secondarily and by intervention of (1). those of type (1) aren't outside the mind or any distance away, and they don't appear to be. they may grow larger or smaller, more confused or more clear or more faint, but they don't can't approach or recede from us. whenever we say an object is at a distance whenever we say that it's coming closer or moving away we must be talking about an object of type (2), which properly belongs to the sense of touch and is not so truly perceived by the eye as suggested by it, in the way thoughts are suggested by the ear.

no sooner do we hear the words of a familiar language pronounced in our ears, but the ideas corresponding thereto present themselves to our minds: in the very same instant the sound and the meaning enter the understanding: so closely are they united that it is not in our power to keep out the one, except we exclude the other also. we even act in all respects as if we heard the very thoughts themselves. so likewise the secondary objects, or those which are only suggested by sight, do often more strongly affect us, and are more regarded than the proper objects of that sense; along with which they enter into the mind, and with which they have a far more strict connexion, than ideas have with words. hence it is we find it so difficult to discriminate between the immediate and mediate objects of sight, and are so prone to attribute to the former what belongs only to the latter. they are, as it were, most closely twisted, blended, and incorporated together. and the prejudice is confirmed and riveted in our thoughts by a long tract of time, by the use of language, and want of reflexion. however, i believe anyone that shall attentively consider what we have already said, and shall say, upon this subject before we have done (especially if he pursue it in his own thoughts) may be able to deliver himself from that prejudice. sure i am it is worth some attention, to whoever would understand the true nature of vision.
when we hear the words of a familiar language, the ideas corresponding to them immediately present themselves to our minds; the sound and the meaning enter the understanding at the very same instant. they are united so closely that it's not in our power to keep out one without excluding the other also. we even act just as though we heard the very thoughts themselves. so likewise the secondary objects the ones that are only suggested by sight often affect us more strongly than the proper objects of that sense do, and are more regarded than them; and they have a far more strict connection with them than ideas have with words. that is why we find it so difficult to discriminate between the immediate and the mediate objects of sight, and are so apt to attribute to the former what belongs only to the latter. they are, as it were, most closely twisted, blended, and incorporated together. and the prejudice is confirmed and riveted in our thoughts by a long stretch of time, by the use of language, and by lack of reflection. however, i believe that anyone who attentively considers what i have said and will say in the course of this work (especially if he pursues it in his own thoughts) may be able to free himself from that prejudice. i'm sure it is worth some attention for anyone who wants to understand the true nature of vision.

i have now done with distance, and proceed to show how it is that we perceive by sight the magnitude of objects. it is the opinion of some that we do it by angles, or by angles in conjunction with distance: but neither angles nor distance being perceivable by sight, and the things we see being in truth at no distance from us, it follows that as we have shown lines and angles not to be the medium the mind makes use of in apprehending the apparent place, so neither are they the medium whereby it apprehends the apparent magnitude of objects.
i have now finished with distance, and proceed to show how we perceive by sight the size of objects. some hold that we do it by angles, or by angles in conjunction with distance; but neither angles and distance are perceivable by sight, and the things we see are actually at no distance from us; so it follows that just as i have shown that the mind doesn't use lines and angles in apprehending an object's apparent place or distance from us, so also they aren't what it uses when it apprehends the object's apparent size.

it is well known that the same extension at a near distance shall subtend a greater angle, and at a farther distance a lesser angle. and by this principle (we are told) the mind estimates the magnitude of an object, comparing the angle under which it is seen with its distance, and thence inferring the magnitude thereof. what inclines men to this mistake (beside the humour of making one see by geometry) is that the same perceptions or ideas which suggest distance do also suggest magnitude. but if we examine it we shall find they suggest the latter as immediately as the former. i say, they do not first suggest distance, and then leave it to the judgment to use that as a medium whereby to collect the magnitude; but they have as close and immediate a connexion with the magnitude as with the distance; and suggest magnitude as independently of distance as they do distance independently of magnitude. all which will be evident to whoever considers what hath been already said, and what follows.
it is well known that a given size at a near distance subtends a bigger angle than it does at a larger distance; and we are told that the mind estimates the size of an object by this principle, relating the angle under which it is seen to its distance, and thence inferring its size. what inclines men to this mistake (beside the impulse to make one see by geometry!) is the fact that the perceptions or ideas that suggest distance do also suggest size. but if we examine this we'll find that they suggest size as immediately as they suggest distance. they don't first suggest distance, and then leave it to the judgment to infer the size from that. they have as close and immediate a connection with the size as with the distance; and suggest size as independently of distance as they do distance independently of size. all this will be evident to anyone who considers what i have said up to here and what follows.

it hath been shown there are two sorts of objects apprehended by sight; each whereof hath its distinct magnitude, or extension. the one, properly tangible, i.e. to be perceived and measured by touch, and not immediately falling under the sense of seeing: the other, properly and immediately visible, by mediation of which the former is brought in view. each of these magnitudes are greater or lesser, according as they contain in them more or fewer points, they being made up of points or minimums. for, whatever may be said of extension in abstract, it is certain sensible extension is not infinitely divisible. there is a minimum tangibile and a minimum visibile, beyond which sense cannot perceive. this everyone's experience will inform him.
i have shown that two sorts of objects are apprehended by sight, each with its own size or extension: one is really tangible, i.e. to be perceived and measured by touch, and not immediately falling under the visual sense; the other is really and immediately visible, and it is through this that the former is brought into view. each of these sizes is made up of points or minimums, and is large or lesser depending on how many points it contains. sensible extension as against extension in abstract is not infinitely divisible; there's a minimum tangibile, such that sense can't perceive anything smaller. everyone's experience will tell him this.

the magnitude of the object which exists without the mind, and is at a distance, continues always invariably the same: but the visible object still changing as you approach to, or recede from, the tangible object, it hath no fixed and determinate greatness. whenever, therefore, we speak of the magnitude of anything, for instance a tree or a house, we must mean the tangible magnitude, otherwise there can be nothing steady and free from ambiguity spoken of it. but though the tangible and visible magnitude in truth belong to two distinct objects: i shall nevertheless (especially since those objects are called by the same name, and are observed to coexist), to avoid tediousness and singularity of speech, sometimes speak of them as belonging to one and the same thing.
the size of the object that exists outside the mind and is at a distance continues always invariably the same. but as you approach or move back from the tangible object, the visible object keeps changing it has no fixed and determinate size. thus, whenever we speak of the size of anything, for instance a tree or a house, we must mean the only thing that is steady and free from ambiguity, namely its tangible size. but though the tangible and visible sizes in truth belong to two distinct objects, those objects are called by the same name and are observed to coexist; so i shall sometimes avoid tediousness and linguistic oddity by speaking of tangible and visible size as belonging to one and the same thing.

now in order to discover by what means the magnitude of tangible objects is perceived by sight. i need only reflect on what passes in my own mind, and observe what those things be which introduce the ideas of greater or lesser into my thoughts, when i look on any object. and these i find to be, first, the magnitude or extension of the visible object, which being immediately perceived by sight, is connected with that other which is tangible and placed at a distance. secondly, the confusion or distinctness. and thirdly, the vigorousness or faintness of the aforesaid visible appearance. ceteris paribus, by how much the greater or lesser the visible object is, by so much the greater or lesser do i conclude the tangible object to be. but, be the idea immediately perceived by sight never so large, yet if it be withal confused, i judge the magnitude of the thing to be but small. if it be distinct and clear, i judge it greater. and if it be faint, i apprehend it to be yet greater. what is here meant by confusion and faintness hath been explained in sect. 35.
to discover how the size of tangible objects is perceived by sight, i need only reflect on what happens in my own mind, and observe what the things are that introduce the ideas of larger or smaller into my thoughts, when i look at any object. i find these to be: (1) the size or extension of the visible object, which is immediately perceived by sight and is connected with the object that is tangible and placed at a distance; (2) the confusion or distinctness of the visible object; (3) the vigorousness or faintness of that visible appearance; other things being equal, the larger (or smaller) the visible object is, i conclude the tangible object to be correspondingly larger (or smaller). but however large the idea immediately perceived by sight, if it is confused i judge the size of the tangible thing to be small; and if it is distinct and clear i judge it to be larger. and if it is faint, i apprehend it to be larger still. what i mean here by confused and faint was been explained in 35.

moreover the judgments we make of greatness do, in like manner as those of distance, depend on the disposition of the eye, also on the figure, number, and situation of objects and other circumstances that have been observed to attend great or small tangible magnitudes. thus, for instance, the very same quantity of visible extension, which in the figure of a tower doth suggest the idea of great magnitude, shall in the figure of a man suggest the idea of much smaller magnitude. that this is owing to the experience we have had of the usual bigness of a tower and a man no one, i suppose, need be told.
our judgments about size, like our judgments about distance, depend on the disposition of the eye and on the shape, number, and location of objects and other details that have been observed to accompany large or small tangible sizes. for example, a given quantity of visible extension will suggest the idea of large size if it has the shape of a tower, and the idea of much smaller size if it has the shape of a man. you don't need me to tell you that this is because of our experience of the usual size of a tower and of a man.

it is also evident that confusion or faintness have no more a necessary connexion with little or great magnitude than they have with little or great distance. as they suggest the latter, so they suggest the former to our minds. and by consequence, if it were not for experience, we should no more judge a faint or confused appearance to be connected with great or little magnitude, than we should that it was connected with great or little distance.
it is also obvious that confusion or faintness aren't necessarily connected with small or large size, any more than they are with small or large distance. as they suggest the distance, so they suggest the size to our minds. if it weren't for experience, we wouldn't judge a faint or confused appearance to be connected with large or small size any more than we would judge it to be connected with large or small distance.

nor will it be found that great or small visible magnitude hath any necessary relation to great or small tangible magnitude: so that the one may certainly be inferred from the other. but before we come to the proof of this, it is fit we consider the difference there is betwixt the extension and figure which is the proper object of touch, and that other which is termed visible; and how the former is principally, though not immediately taken notice of, when we look at any object. this has been before mentioned, but we shall here inquire into the cause thereof. we regard the objects that environ us in proportion as they are adapted to benefit or injure our own bodies, and thereby produce in our minds the sensation of pleasure or pain. now bodies operating on our organs, by an immediate application, and the hurt or advantage arising therefrom, depending altogether on the tangible, and not at all on the visible, qualities of any object: this is a plain reason why those should be regarded by us much more than these: and for this end the visive sense seems to have been bestowed on animals, to wit, that by the perception of visible ideas (which in themselves are not capable of affecting or any wise altering the frame of their bodies) they may be able to foresee (from the experience they have had what tangible ideas are connected with such and such visible ideas) and damage or benefit which is like to ensue, upon the application of their own bodies to this or that body which is at a distance. which foresight, how necessary it is to the preservation of an animal, everyone's experience can inform him. hence it is that when we look at an object, the tangible figure and extension thereof are principally attended to; whilst there is small heed taken of the visible figure and magnitude, which, though more immediately perceived, do less concern us, and are not fitted to produce any alteration in our bodies.
and it won't be found, either, that large or small visible size has any necessary relation to large or small tangible size, enabling one to be inferred with certainty from the other. but before i come to the proof of this in 62, i should consider the difference between the extension and shape that is the proper object of touch and the extension and shape that is termed visible; and how when we look at any object it's the tangible extension and shape that we take notice of principally but not immediately. we regard the objects around us in proportion as they are apt to benefit or injure our own bodies and thereby produce in our minds the sensations of pleasure or pain. now, we are apt to get hurt or advantage from bodies operating immediately directly on our organs; and this depends entirely on the bodies tangible qualities and not at all on the visible ones. this is a plain reason for us to give the tangible qualities much more importance than the visible ones; and that seems to be why the visual sense was bestowed on animals: by the perception of visible ideas (which in themselves can't make any difference to their bodily condition) they can foresee the damage or benefit that is like to ensue if this or that body that is now at a distance comes to be directly applied to their own bodies this foreseeing depending on the experience they have had concerning what tangible ideas are connected with what visible ones. your own experience will tell you how necessary this foresight is to an animal's preservation. that is why when we look at an object we principally attend to its tangible shape and size, taking little heed of the visible shape and size. these, though more immediately perceived, concern us less because they aren't fitted to produce any alteration in our bodies.

that the matter of fact is true will be evident to anyone who considers that a man placed at ten foot distance is thought as great as if he were placed at a distance only of five foot: which is true not with relation to the visible, but tangible greatness of the object: the visible magnitude being far greater at one station: than it is at the other.
that this is how things stand will be evident to anyone who considers that a man ten feet away is thought to be as large as if he were only of five feet away; which is true with relation to his tangible size, but not his visible size, which is much bigger at one distance than at the other.

inches, feet, etc., are settled stated lengths whereby we measure objects and estimate their magnitude: we say, for example, an object appears to be six inches or six foot long. now, that this cannot be meant of visible inches, etc., is evident, because a visible inch is itself no constant, determinate magnitude, and cannot therefore serve to mark out and determine the magnitude of any other thing. take an inch marked upon a ruler: view it, successively, at the distance of half a foot, a foot, a foot and a half, etc., from the eye: at each of which, and at all the intermediate distances, the inch shall have a different visible extension, i.e. there shall be more or fewer points discerned in it. now i ask which of all these various extensions is that stated, determinate one that is agreed on for a common measure of other magnitudes? no reason can be assigned why we should pitch on one more than another: and except there be some invariable, determinate extension fixed on to be marked to the word inch, it is plain it can be used to little purpose; and to say a thing contains this or that number of inches shall imply no more than that it is extended, without bringing any particular idea of that extension into the mind. farther, an inch and a foot, from different distances, shall both exhibit the same visible magnitude, and yet at the same time you shall say that one seems several times greater than the other. from all which it is manifest that the judgments we make of the magnitude of objects by sight are altogether in reference to their tangible extension. whenever we say an object is great, or small, of this or that determinate measure, i say it must be meant of the tangible, and not the visible extension, which, though immediately perceived, is nevertheless little taken notice of.
inches, feet, etc. are settled stated lengths by which we measure objects or estimate their size; we say for example that an object appears to be six inches long. we can't be talking about visible inches because a visible inch isn't a constant, determinate size, so it can't serve to mark out and determine the size of anything else. take an inch marked on a ruler; view it from several different distances; at each distance the inch will have a different visible extension, i.e. there will be more or fewer points discerned in it. which of these various extensions is the determinate one that is agreed on for a common measure of other sizes? no reason can be given for selecting one rather than another. if there weren't some invariable, determinate extension fixed on to be marked by the word inch, it obviously would be pointless to say that that a thing contains this or that number of inches the most it could mean is that the thing is extended. and there's this: an inch and a foot will exhibit the same visible size from different distances, yet we say that one seems several times larger than the other. from all this it is clear that the sight-based judgments that we make about the size of objects refer solely to their tangible extension. whenever we say that an object is large, or small, or of such-and-such a size, we must be talking about the tangible and not the visible extension; the latter, though immediately perceived, is little taken notice of.

now, that there is no necessary connexion between these two distinct extensions is evident from hence: because our eyes might have been framed in such a manner as to be able to see nothing but what were less than the minimum tangibile. in which case it is not impossible we might have perceived all the immediate objects of sight, the very same that we do now: but unto those visible appearances there would not be connected those different tangible magnitudes that are now. which shows the judgments we make of the magnitude of things placed at a distance from the various greatness of the immediate objects of sight do not arise from any essential or necessary but only a customary tie, which has been observed between them.
that these two extensions are not necessarily connected is evident from this: our eyes might have been structured in such a way that they couldn't see anything except what is less than the minimum tangibile. in that case we might have perceived the very same immediate objects of sight that we do now, but they wouldn't be connected (for us) with the different tangible sizes that they are now. which shows that the judgments we make about the size of things placed at a distance, on the basis of the various sizes of the immediate objects of sight, aren't based on any essential or necessary connection between them, but only on a customary tie that has been observed between them.

moreover, it is not only certain that any idea of sight might not have been connected with this or that idea of touch, which we now observe to accompany it: but also that the greater visible magnitudes might have been connected with, and introduced into our minds lesser tangible magnitudes and the lesser visible magnitudes greater tangible magnitudes. nay, that it actually is so we have daily experience; that object which makes a strong and large appearance, not seeming near so great as another, the visible magnitude whereof is much less, but more faint, and the appearance upper, or which is the same thing painted lower on the retina, which faintness and situation suggest both greater magnitude and greater distance.
moreover, it is not only certain that any idea of sight might not have been connected with the particular idea of touch that we now observe to accompany it it is also certain that larger visible sizes might have been connected with (and introduced into our minds) smaller tangible sizes, and the smaller visible sizes larger tangible sizes. indeed, we have daily experience that this actually does happen: an object that makes a strong and large appearance doesn't seem nearly as large as another whose visible size is much less but more faint and the appearance upper or (the same thing) painted lower on the retina, which faintness and situation suggest both larger size and greater distance.

from which, and from sect. 57 and 58, it is manifest that as we do not perceive the magnitudes of objects immediately by sight, so neither do we perceive them by the mediation of anything which has a necessary connexion with them. those ideas that now suggest unto us the various magnitudes of external objects before we touch them, might possibly have suggested no such thing: or they might have signified them in a direct contrary manner: so that the very same ideas, on the perception whereof we judge an object to be small, might as well have served to make us conclude it great. those ideas being in their own nature equally fitted to bring into our minds the idea of small or great, or no size at all of outward objects; just as the words of any language are in their own nature indifferent to signify this or that thing or nothing at all.
from this and from 57-58 it's clear that just as we don't perceive the sizes of objects immediately by sight, we also don't perceive them by the mediation of anything that has a necessary connection with them. the ideas that now suggest to us the various sizes of external objects before we touch them could have suggested no such thing; or they might have signified them in a directly contrary manner, so that the visual ideas that lead us to judge an object to be small served instead to make us conclude it to be large. our visual ideas are comparable with words, the intrinsic nature of which is equally fit for meaning this or that or nothing at all.

as we see distance, so we see magnitude. and we see both in the same way that we see shame or anger in the looks of a man. those passions are themselves invisible, they are nevertheless let in by the eye along with colours and alterations of countenance, which are the immediate object of vision: and which signify them for no other reason than barely because they have been observed to accompany them. without which experience we should no more have taken blushing for a sign of shame than of gladness.
as we see distance, so we see size. and we see both in the same way that we see shame or anger in the looks of a man. those passions are themselves invisible, but they are let in by the eye along with the colours and changes of facial expression that are the immediate object of vision, and signify the passions merely because they have been observed to accompany them. if we hadn't experienced that, we wouldn't have taken blushing for a sign of shame any more than of gladness.

we are nevertheless exceeding prone to imagine those things which are perceived only by the mediation of others to be themselves the immediate objects of sight; or, at least, to have in their own nature a fitness to be suggested by them, before ever they had been experienced to coexist with them. from which prejudice everyone, perhaps, will not find it easy to emancipate himself, by any the clearest convictions of reason. and there are some grounds to think that if there was one only invariable and universal languages in the world, and that men were born with the faculty of speaking it, it would be the opinion of many that the ideas of other men's minds were properly perceived by the ear, or had at least a necessary and inseparable tie with the sounds that were affixed to them. all which seems to arise from want of a due application of our discerning faculty, thereby to discriminate between the ideas that are in our understandings, and consider them apart from each other; which would preserve us from confounding those that are different, and make us see what ideas do, and what do not include or imply this or that other idea.
yet we are exceedingly prone to imagine things that are perceived only by the mediation of other things to be themselves immediate objects of sight, or at least to be intrinsically fit to be suggested by those other things before being experienced to coexist with them. not everyone will find it easy to emancipate himself from this prejudice, however clearly the case against it is made out. there are reasons to think that if there was only one language in the world one that didn't change and men were born with the ability to speak it, many people would believe that the ideas in other men's minds were strictly perceived by the ear, or at least had a necessary and inseparable tie with the sounds associated with them. all of which seems to arise from a failure to make proper use of our discerning faculty our ability to make distinctions in order to distinguish among the ideas in our understandings and consider them apart from each other. that would preserve us from running together ideas that are different, and would make us see whether this or that idea includes or implies this or that other idea.

there is a celebrated phenomenon, the solution whereof i shall attempt to give by the principles that have been laid down, in reference to the manner wherein we apprehend by sight the magnitude of objects. the apparent magnitude of the moon when placed in the horizon is much greater than when it is in the meridian, though the angle under which the diameter of the moon is seen be not observed greater in the former case than in the latter: and the horizontal moon doth not constantly appear of the same bigness, but at some times seemeth far greater than at others.
here is a celebrated phenomenon: when the moon is on the horizon its apparent size is much greater than when it is directly overhead, although the angle under which the moon's diameter is seen isn't found to be larger in the former case than in the latter. also, the horizontal moon doesn't always have the same apparent size; it seems far larger at some times than at others. i shall try to explain this, using the principles i have laid down concerning how we apprehend by sight the size of objects.

now in order to explain the reason of the moon's appearing greater than ordinary in the horizon, it must be observed that the particles which compose our atmosphere intercept the rays of light proceeding from any object to the eye; and by how much the greater is the portion of atmosphere interjacent between the object and the eye, by so much the more are the rays intercepted; and by consequence the appearance of the object rendered more faint, every object appearing more vigorous or more faint in proportion as it sendeth more or fewer rays into the eye. now between the eye and the moon, when situated in the horizon, there lies a far greater quantity of atmosphere than there does when the moon is in the meridian. whence it comes to pass that the appearance of the horizontal moon is fainter, and therefore by sect. 56 it should be thought bigger in that situation than in the meridian, or in any other elevation above the horizon.
the explanation requires us to take account of this: the particles that compose our atmosphere intercept the rays of light coming from any object to the eye; and the bigger the portion of atmosphere between the object and the eye, the more the rays are intercepted, thus making the appearance of the object more faint. now, when the moon is on the horizon there is much more atmosphere between it and the eye than there is when it is directly overhead. this brings it about that the appearance of the horizontal moon is fainter, and therefore by 56 it should be thought bigger in that situation than when it is directly overhead or at any other elevation above the horizon.

farther, the air being variously impregnated, sometimes more and sometimes less, with vapours and exhalations fitted to retund and intercept the rays of light, it follows that the appearance of the horizontal moon hath not always an equal faintness, and by consequence that luminary, though in the very same situation, is at one time judged greater than at another.
also, because the air is impregnated varyingly sometimes more and sometimes less with vapours and exhalations that can intercept and beat back the rays of light, it follows that the appearance of the horizontal moon isn't always equally faint, so that it is judged larger at some times than at others although it is in the very same situation.

that we have here given the true account of the phenomena of the horizontal moon will, i suppose, be farther evident to anyone from the following considerations. first, it is plain that which in this case suggests the idea of greater magnitude must be something which is itself perceived; for that which is unperceived cannot suggest to our perception any other thing. secondly, it must be something that does not constantly remain the same, but is subject to some change or variation, since the appearance of the horizontal moon varies, being at one time greater than at another. and yet, thirdly, it cannot be the visible figure or magnitude, since that remains the same, or is rather lesser, by how much the moon is nearer to the horizon. it remains therefore that the true cause is that affection or alteration of the visible appearance which proceeds from the greater paucity of rays arriving at the eye, and which i term faintness: since this answers all the forementioned conditions, and i am not conscious of any other perception that doth.
to be even surer that this is the true explanation of the phenomena of the horizontal moon, consider: (a) whatever it is that suggests the idea of larger size in this case must be something that is itself perceived; for something that isn't perceived can't suggest anything else to our perception. (b) it must be something that undergoes some change or variation, because the appearance of the horizontal moon varies, being at one time larger than at another. (c) it can't be the visible shape or size, because that remains the same, or rather the visible size is lesser by how much the moon is nearer to the horizon. so we are left with the true cause being the alteration of the visible appearance that comes from the greater paucity of rays arriving at the eye what i call faintness. this satisfies (a)-(c), and i'm not aware that any other perception does so.

add to this that in misty weather it is a common observation that the appearance of the horizontal moon is far larger than usual, which greatly conspires with and strengthens our opinion. neither would it prove in the least irreconcilable with what we have said, if the horizontal moon should chance sometimes to seem enlarged beyond its usual extent, even in more serene weather. for we must not only have regard to the mist which happens to be in the place where we stand; we ought also to take into our thoughts the whole sum of vapours and exhalations which lie betwixt the eye and the moon: all which cooperating to render the appearance of the moon more faint, and thereby increase its magnitude, it may chance to appear greater than it usually does, even in the horizontal position, at a time when, though there be no extraordinary fog or haziness, just in the place where we stand, yet the air between the eye and the moon, taken all together, may be loaded with a greater quantity of interspersed vapours and exhalations than at other times.
add to this the common observation that in misty weather the appearance of the horizontal moon is far larger than usual; this works with and greatly strengthens my explanation. and if it turned out that the horizontal moon sometimes seem enlarged beyond its usual extent even in clearer weather, that is perfectly consistent with what i have said. that is because we must take into account not only the mist that happens to be in the place where we stand but also the whole sum of vapours and exhalations that lie between the eye and the moon. these could all cooperate in making the moon's appearance more faint and thereby increasing its size.

it may be objected that in consequence of our principles the interposition of a body in some degree opaque, which may intercept a great part of the rays of light, should render the appearance of the moon in the meridian as large as when it is viewed in the horizon. to which i answer, it is not faintness anyhow applied that suggests greater magnitude, there being no necessary but only an experimental connexion between those two things. it follows that the faintness which enlarges the appearance must be applied in such sort, and with such circumstances, as have been observed to attend the vision of great magnitudes. when from a distance we behold great objects, the particles of the intermediate air and vapours, which are themselves unperceivable, do interrupt the rays of light, and thereby render the appearance less strong and vivid: now, faintness of appearance caused in this sort hath been experienced to coexist with great magnitude. but when it is caused by the interposition of an opaque sensible body, this circumstance alters the case, so that a faint appearance this way caused doth not suggest greater magnitude, because it hath not been experienced to coexist with it.
it may be objected that on my principles the interposition of a somewhat opaque body which can intercept a great part of the rays of light will make the appearance of the overhead moon as large as that of the horizontal moon. i answer that what suggests larger size is not faintness as such but faintness of a kind and in circumstances that have been observed to accompany the vision of large sizes. we're not dealing with a necessary connection here, but only an experimental connection between those two things. when we see large objects from a distance, the unperceivable particles of the intervening air and vapours interrupt the rays of light, making the appearance less strong and vivid; and faintness of appearance caused in this way has been experienced to coexist with large size. but when it is caused by the interposition of an opaque perceivable body, this circumstance alters the case: a faint appearance caused in this way doesn't suggest larger size, because it hasn't been experienced to coexist with it.

if we attentively consider the phenomenon before us, we shall find the not discerning between the mediate and immediate objects of sight to be the chief cause of the difficulty that occurs in the explication of it. the magnitude of the visible moon, or that which is the proper and immediate object of vision, is not greater when the moon is in the horizon than when it is in the meridian. how comes it, therefore, to seem greater in one situation than the other? what is it can put this cheat on the understanding? it has no other perception of the moon than what it gets by sight: and that which is seen is of the same extent, i say, the visible appearance hath the same, or rather a less, magnitude when the moon is viewed in the horizontal than when in the meridional position: and yet it is esteemed greater in the former than in the latter. herein consists the difficulty, which doth vanish and admit of a most easy solution, if we consider that as the visible moon is not greater in the horizon than in the meridian, so neither is it thought to be so. it hath been already shown that in any act of vision the visible object absolutely, or in itself, is little taken notice of, the mind still carrying its view from that to some tangible ideas which have been observed to be connected with it, and by that means come to be suggested by it. so that when a thing is said to appear great or small, or whatever estimate be made of the magnitude of any thing, this is meant not of the visible but of the tangible object. this duly considered, it will be no hard matter to reconcile the seeming contradiction there is, that the moon should appear of a different bigness, the visible magnitude thereof remaining still the same. for by sect. 56 the very same visible extension, with a different faintness, shall suggest a different tangible extension. when therefore the horizontal moon is said to appear greater than the meridional moon, this must be understood not of a greater visible extension, but a of greater tangible or real extension, which by reason of the more than ordinary faintness of the visible appearance, is suggested to the mind along with it.
if we attentively consider the phenomenon before us, we shall find that what mainly makes it hard for people to explain it is their failure to distinguish the mediate from the immediate objects of sight. the size of the visible moon i.e. of that which is the proper and immediate object of vision is no larger when the moon is on the horizon than when it is directly overhead. so how does it come to seem larger in one situation than the other? what can cheat the understanding in this way? its only perception of the moon is what it gets by sight; and what is seen i.e. the visible appearance has the same size, or rather a smaller size, when the moon is viewed on the horizon than when it is viewed overhead; and yet it is judged larger in the former than in the latter. this difficulty vanishes admits of a most easy solution if we consider that the visible moon not only isn't larger on the horizon than directly overhead but also isn't thought to be larger. i have already shown that in any act of vision the visible object in itself is hardly noticed because the mind moves right along from it to some tangible ideas that have been observed to be connected with it and thus come to be suggested by it. so when a thing is said to appear large or appear small this is being said not about the visible object but about the tangible object. when you think about this you'll find it easy to reconcile the seeming contradiction in the moon's appearing to have a different size when its visible size remains the same. for by 56 the very same visible extension, with a different faintness, suggests a different tangible extension. so when the horizontal moon is said to appear larger than the overhead moon, this must be understood as asserting not a larger visible extension but a larger tangible or real extension that is suggested to the mind by the unusual faintness of the visible appearance.

many attempts have been made by learned men to account for this appearance. gassendus, descartes, hobbes, and several others have employed their thoughts on that subject; but how fruitless and unsatisfactory their endeavours have been is sufficiently shown in the transactions, where you may see their several opinions at large set forth and confuted, not without some surprize at the gross blunders that ingenious men have been forced into by endeavouring to reconcile this appearance with the ordinary principles of optics. since the writing of which there hath been published in the transactions another paper relating to the same affair by the celebrated dr. wallis, wherein he attempts to account for that phenomenon which, though it seems not to contain anything new or different from what had been said before by others, i shall nevertheless consider in this place.
many attempts have been made by learned men to account for this appearance. gassendi, descartes, hobbes and several others have employed their thoughts on that subject; but how fruitless and unsatisfactory their attempts have been is sufficiently shown by mr molyneux in the philosophical transactions 187, where you can see their various opinions set forth and confuted, with some surprise at the gross blunders that ingenious men have been forced into by trying to reconcile this appearance with the ordinary principles of optics. since the writing of that paper the transactions have published another paper on this matter a paper in which the celebrated dr wallis tries to account for horizontal-moon phenomenon. the paper seems not to contain anything new, or different from what had been said before by others, but i shall consider it here.

his opinion, in short, is this; we judge not of the magnitude of an object by the visual angle alone, but by the visual angle in conjunction with the distance. hence, though the angle remain the same, or even become less, yet if withal the distance seem to have been increased, the object shall appear greater. now, one way whereby we estimate the distance of anything is by the number and extent of the intermediate objects: when therefore the moon is seen in the horizon, the variety of fields, houses, etc., together with the large prospect of the wide extended land or sea that lies between the eye and the utmost limb of the horizon, suggest unto the mind the idea of greater distance, and consequently magnify the appearance. and this, according to dr. wallis, is the true account of the extraordinary largeness attributed by the mind to the horizontal moon at a time when the angle subtended by its diameter is not one jot greater than it used to be.
wallis's opinion, in short, is this: we judge the size of an object not by the visual angle alone but by that in conjunction with the distance. so even if the angle remains the same or even becomes less, if the distance seems to have been increased the object will appear larger. now, one of our ways of estimating the distance of anything is by the number and extent of the intermediate objects; so when the moon is seen on the horizon, the variety of fields, houses, etc. together with the large prospect of the wide land or sea that lies between the eye and the horizon suggest to the mind the idea of greater distance, and consequently magnify the appearance. this, according to dr wallis, is the true explanation of the extraordinary largeness attributed by the mind to the horizontal moon at a time when the angle subtended by its diameter is not one jot larger than it is usually.

this phenomenon of the horizontal moon is a clear instance of the insufficiency of lines and angles for explaining the way wherein the mind perceives and estimates the magnitude of outward objects. there is nevertheless a use of computation by them in order to determine the apparent magnitude of things, so far as they have a connexion with, and are proportional to, those other ideas or perceptions which are the true and immediate occasions that suggest to the mind the apparent magnitude of things. but this in general may, i think, be observed concerning mathematical computation in optics: that it can never be very precise and exact since the judgments we make of the magnitude of external things do often depend on several circumstances, which are not proportionable to, or capable of being defined by, lines and angles.
this phenomenon of the horizontal moon is a clear example of the inadequacy of lines and angles for explaining how the mind perceives and estimates the size of external objects. they do have some use in computing the apparent size of things, insofar as they are connected with and proportional to those other ideas or perceptions that are the true and immediate occasions that suggest things apparent sizes to the mind. but mathematical computation in optics can never be very precise and exact, because our judgments about the size of external things often depend on several circumstances that are not proportional to lines and angles and can't be defined by them.

from what has been said we may safely deduce this consequence; to wit, that a man born blind and made to see would, at first opening of his eyes, make a very different judgment of the magnitude of objects intromitted by them from what others do. he would not consider the ideas of sight with reference to, or as having any connexion with, the ideas of touch: his view of them being entirely terminated within themselves, he can no otherwise judge them great or small than as they contain a greater or lesser number of visible points. now, it being certain that any visible point can cover or exclude from view only one other visible point, it follows that whatever object intercepts the view of another hath an equal number of visible points with it; and consequently they shall both be thought by him to have the same magnitude. hence it is evident one in those circumstances would judge his thumb, with which he might hide a tower or hinder its being seen, equal to that tower, or his hand, the interposition whereof might conceal experimental means the firmament from his view, equal to the firmament: how great an inequality soever there may in our apprehensions seem to be betwixt those two things, because of the customary and close connexion that has grown up in our minds between the objects of sight and touch; whereby the very different and distinct ideas of those two senses are so blended and confounded together as to be mistaken for one and the same thing; out of which prejudice we cannot easily extricate ourselves.
from what i have said we can safely infer this: a man born blind, and made to see, would on first opening his eyes make, regarding the sizes of the objects presented by them, a very different judgment from what others do. he wouldn't consider the ideas of sight with reference to the ideas of touch, or as having any connection with them. his view of them being entirely terminated within themselves, he can't judge them great or small except on the basis of their containing a larger or smaller number of visible points. now, all that a visible point can cover or exclude from view is one other visible point; so whatever object intercepts the view of another has an equal number of visible points; and consequently the newly sighted man will think they have the same size. he might use his thumb to hide a tower, in which case he'll think they have the same size; his hand could conceal the firmament from his view, leading him to think that they are equal in size. how great an inequality soever there may, in our apprehensions, seem to be between those two things, because of the customary and close connection that has grown up in our minds between the objects of sight and touch, whereby the very different and distinct ideas of those two senses are so blended and confounded together, as to be mistaken for one and the same thing; out of which prejudice we cannot easily extricate ourselves.

for the better explaining the nature of vision, and setting the manner wherein we perceive magnitudes in a due light, i shall proceed to make some observations concerning matters relating thereto, whereof the want of reflexion, and duly separating between tangible and visible ideas, is apt to create in us mistaken and confused notions. and first, i shall observe that the minimum visibile is exactly equal in all beings whatsoever that are endowed with the visive faculty. no exquisite formation of the eye, no peculiar sharpness of sight, can make it less in one creature than in another; for it not being distinguishable into parts, nor in any wise a consisting of them, it must necessarily be the same to all. for suppose it otherwise, and that the minimum visibile of a mite, for instance, be less than the minimum visibile of a man: the latter therefore may by detraction of some part be made equal to the former: it doth therefore consist of parts, which is inconsistent with the notion of a minimum visibile or point.
to improve my account of the nature of vision and set the way we perceive sizes in a due light, i shall make some observations about matters that relate to this matters that are apt to create in us mistaken and confused notions if we don't reflect enough and separate tangible ideas from visible ones. my first observation is that the minimum visibile is exactly equal in all beings that have eyesight. no exquisite formation of the eye, no special sharpness of sight, can make it less in one creature than in another; for it doesn't have parts and so must be the same for all. suppose that the minimum visibile x of a mite, for instance, were less than the minimum visibile y of a man; then y could be made equal to x by the removal of some part; so it would have parts, which is inconsistent with the notion of a minimum visibile or point.

it will perhaps be objected that the minimum visibile of a man doth really and in itself contain parts whereby it surpasses that of a mite, though they are not perceivable by the man. to which i answer, the minimum visibile having (in like manner as all other the proper and immediate objects of sight) been shown not to have any existence without the mind of him who sees it, it follows there cannot be any pan of it that is not actually perceived, and therefore visible. now for any object to contain distinct visible parts, and at the same time to be a minimum visibile, is a manifest contradiction.
you might want to object: the minimum visibile of a man really does contain parts whereby it surpasses that of a mite, but the parts aren't perceivable by the man. to which i answer that the minimum visibile has been shown to have no existence outside the mind of him who sees it, so it can't have any part that isn't actually perceived and therefore visible. (in this respect it is like all the other proper and immediate objects of sight.) and for any object to contain several distinct visible parts and at the same time to be a minimum visibile is obviously a contradiction.

of these visible points we see at all times an equal number. it is every whit as great when our view is contracted and bounded by near objects as when it is extended to larger and remoter. for it being impossible that one minimum visibile should obscure or keep out of sight mote than one other, it is a plain consequence that when my view is on all sides bounded by the walls of my study see just as many visible points as i could, in case that by the removal of the study-walls and all other obstructions, i had a full prospect of the circumjacent fields, mountains, sea, and open firmament: for so long as i am shut up within the walls, by their interposition every point of the external objects is covered from my view: but each point that is seen being able to cover or exclude from sight one only other corresponding point, it follows that whilst my sight is confined to those narrow walls i see as many points, or minima visibilia, as i should were those walls away, by looking on all the external objects whose prospect is intercepted by them. whenever therefore we are said to have a greater prospect at one time than another, this must be understood with relation, not to the proper and immediate, but the secondary and mediate objects of vision, which, as hath been shown, properly belong to the touch.
at every moment we see an equal number of these visible points. the number is just as great when our view is contracted and bounded by near objects as when it extends to objects that are larger and more distant. because one minimum visibile can't possibly keep out of sight more than one other, it clearly follows that when my view is bounded on all sides by the walls of my study i see just as many visible points as i could if the study-walls and other obstructions were removed and i had a full view of the surrounding fields, mountains, sea, and open firmament. thus, whenever we are said to have a greater prospect at one time than another, this must be understood to refer not to the proper and immediate objects of vision but to the secondary and mediate ones, which i have shown to belong properly to the sense of touch.

the visive faculty considered with reference to its immediate objects may be found to labour of two defects. first, in respect of the extent or number of visible points that are at once perceivable by it, which is narrow and limited to a certain degree. it can take in at one view but a certain determinate number of minima visibilia, beyond which it cannot extend its prospect. secondly, our sight is defective in that its view is not only narrow, but also for the most part confused: of those things that we take in at one prospect we can see but a few at once clearly and unconfusedly: and the more we fix our sight on any one object, by so much the darker and more indistinct shall the rest appear.
the visual faculty considered with reference to its immediate objects has two defects. the extent or number of visible points that are at once perceivable by it is narrow and limited to a certain degree. it can take in at one view only a certain determinate number of minima visibilia, beyond which it can't extend its prospect. our sight is not only narrow but also for the most part confused; of the things we take in at one view we can see only a few at once clearly and unconfusedly; and the more we fix our sight on any one object the darker and more indistinct the rest will appear.

corresponding to these two defects of sight, we may imagine as many perfections, to wit, 1st, that of comprehending in one view a greater number of visible points. 2dly, of being able to view them all equally and at once with the utmost clearness and distinction. that those perfections are not actually in some intelligences of a different order and capacity from ours it is impossible for us to know.
corresponding to these two defects of sight we may imagine two perfections: comprehending in one view a larger number of visible points, and being able to view them all equally and at once, with the utmost clearness and distinctness. are there some intelligences of a different order and capacity from ours that actually have those perfections? it is impossible for us to know.

in neither of those two ways do microscopes contribute to the improvement of sight; for when we look through a microscope we neither see more visible points, nor are the collateral points more distinct than when we look with the naked eye at objects placed in a due distance. a microscope brings us, as it were, into a new world: it presents us with a new scene of visible objects quite different from what we behold with the naked eye. but herein consists the most remarkable difference, to wit, that whereas the objects perceived by the eye alone have a certain connexion with tangible objects, whereby we are taught to foresee what will ensue upon the approach or application of distant objects to the parts of our own body, which much conduceth to its preservation, there is not the like connexion between things tangible and those visible objects that are perceived by help of a fine microscope.
microscopes don't contribute to the improvement of sight in either of those two ways. when we look through a microscope we don't see more visible points, and the points we see at one time aren't more distinct, than when we look with the naked eye at objects placed in a due distance. a microscope brings us into a new world, so to speak, presenting us with a new scene of visible objects that is quite different from what we see with the naked eye. the most remarkable difference is this: whereas the objects perceived by the eye alone have a certain connection with tangible objects, from which we learn to foresee what will happen when distant objects approach or touch the parts of our own body (which contributes greatly to our body's preservation), there is no such connection between tangible things and the visible objects that are perceived by help of a fine microscope.

hence it is evident that were our eyes turned into the nature of microscopes, we should not be much benefited by the change; we should be deprived of the forementioned advantage we at present receive by the visive faculty, and have left us only the empty amusement of seeing, without any other benefit arising from it. but in that case, it will perhaps be said, our sight would be endued with a far greater sharpness and penetration than it now hath. but it is certain from what we have already shown that the minimum visibile is never greater or lesser, but in all cases constantly the same: and in the case of microscopical eyes i see only this difference, to wit, that upon the ceasing of a certain observable connexion betwixt the divers perceptions of sight and touch, which before enabled us to regulate our actions by the eye, it would now be rendered utterly unserviceable to that purpose.
hence it is evident that we would not be much benefited by having our eyes given the nature of microscopes. we would be deprived of the advantage i have just mentioned that we at present get from the visual faculty, and would be left with only the empty pastime of seeing, without any other benefit arising from it. you may want to say: but in that case our sight would be far sharper and more penetrating than it now is. but what is that sharpness that is regarded as such a great an excellency of sight? from what i have already shown, it is certain that the minimum visibile is never larger or lesser, but in all cases constantly the same; and the only difference that microscopical eyes would make, as far as i can see, is that we would lose the observable connection between our various perceptions of sight and touch, which before enabled us to regulate our actions by the eye, so that now our eyes would be utterly unserviceable for that purpose.

upon the whole it seems that if we consider the use and end of sight, together with the present state and circumstances of our being, we shall not find any great cause to complain of any defect or imperfection in it, or easily conceive how it could be mended. with such admirable wisdom is that faculty contrived, both for the pleasure and convenience of life.
upon the whole it seems that if we consider the use and purpose of sight, together with the present state and circumstances of our existence, we shan't find any great cause to complain of any defect or imperfection in it, or easily conceive how it could be improved. with such admirable wisdom is that faculty designed for the pleasure and convenience of life.

having finished what i intended to say concerning the distance and magnitude of objects, i come now to treat of the manner wherein the mind perceives by sight their situation. among the discoveries of the last age, it is reputed none of the least that the manner of vision hath been more clearly explained than ever it had been before. there is at this day no one ignorant that the pictures of external objects are painted on the retina, or fund of the eye: that we can see nothing which is not so painted: and that, according as the picture is more distinct or confused, so also is the perception we have of the object: but then in this explication of vision there occurs one mighty difficulty. the objects are painted in an inverted order on the bottom of the eye: the upper part of any object being painted on the lower part of the eye, and the lower part of the object on the upper part of the eye: and so also as to right and left. since therefore the pictures are thus inverted, it is demanded how it comes to pass that we see the objects erect and in their natural posture?
having finished what i intended to say about the distance and size of objects, i shall now discuss the way in which the mind perceives by sight objects orientation. among the discoveries of recent years one of the most notable has been an explanation clearer than any we ever had before of how vision works. everyone knows today that the pictures of external objects are painted on the retina, that we can't see anything that isn't so painted, and that according as the picture is more distinct or confused, so also is our perception of the object. but there's one mighty difficulty in this explanation of vision. the objects are painted in an inverted order at the back of the eye: the upper part of an object is painted on the lower part of the eye, and the lower part of the object on the upper part of the eye; and there's a switch also as to right and left. since the pictures are thus inverted, the question is raised as to how we come to see the objects erect and in their natural posture?

in answer to this difficulty we are told that the mind, perceiving an impulse of a ray of light on the upper part of the eye, considers this ray as coming in a direct line from the lower part of the object; and in like manner tracing the ray that strikes on the lower part of the eye, it is directed to the upper part of the object. thus in the adjacent figure, c, the lower point of the object abc, is projected on c the upper part of the eye. so likewise the highest point a is projected on a the lowest part of the eye, which makes the representation cba inverted: but the mind considering the stroke that is made on c as coming in the straight line cc from the lower end of the object; and the stroke or impulse on a as coming in the line aa from the upper end of the object, is directed to make a right judgment of the situation of the object abc, notwithstanding the picture of it is inverted. this is illustrated by conceiving a blind man who, holding in his hands two sticks that cross each other, doth with them touch the extremities of an object, placed in a perpendicular situation. it is certain this man will judge that to be the upper part of the object which he touches with the stick held in the undermost hand, and that to be the lower part of the object which he touches with the stick in his uppermost hand. this is the common explication of the erect appearance of objects, which is generally received and acquiesced in, being (as mr. molyneux tells us) allowed by all men as satisfactory.
the accepted answer to this difficulty goes as follows: the mind, perceiving an impulse of a ray of light on the upper part of the eye, considers this ray as coming in a direct line from the lower part of the object; and in tracing the ray that strikes on the lower part of the eye it is directed to the upper part of the object. thus in the above figure c, the lowest point of the object abc, is projected onto c the upper part of the eye; and the highest point a is projected onto a the lowest part of the eye, so that the representation cba is inverted. but the mind considering the stroke that is made on c as coming in the straight line cc from the lower end of the object; and the stroke or impulse on a as coming in the line aa from the upper end of the object, is directed to make a correct judgment of the orientation of the object abc, despite its picture's being inverted. this is illustrated in terms of a blind man holding in his hands two sticks that cross each other, touching with them the top and the bottom of some object. this man will judge that what he touches with the stick held in the lower hand is the upper part of the object, and that what he touches with the stick in his upper hand is the lower part of the object. this is the common explanation of the erect appearance of objects; molyneux tells us that everyone finds it satisfactory.

but this account to me does not seem in any degree true. did i perceive those impulses, decussations, and directions of the rays of light in like manner as hath been set forth, then indeed it would not be altogether void of probability. and there might be some pretence for the comparison of the blind man and his cross sticks. but the case is far otherwise. i know very well that i perceive no such thing. and of consequence i cannot thereby make an estimate of the situation of objects. i appeal to anyone's experience, whether he be conscious to himself that he thinks on the intersection made by the radious pencils, or pursues the impulses they give in right lines, whenever he perceives by sight the position of any object? to me it seems evident that crossing and tracing of the rays is never thought on by children, idiots, or in truth by any other, save only those who have applied themselves to the study of optics. and for the mind to judge of the situation of objects by those things without perceiving them, or to perceive them without knowing it, is equally beyond my comprehension. add to this that the explaining the manner of vision by the example of cross sticks and hunting for the object along the axes of the radious pencils, doth suppose the proper objects of sight to be perceived at a distance from us, contrary to what hath been demonstrated.
but this account doesn't strike me as any degree true. if i perceived those impulses, cross-overs and directions of light-rays in the way described in the account, it wouldn't at first view be altogether void of probability. and there might be something to the comparison of sight with the blind man and his crossed sticks. but the case is far otherwise. i know very well that i perceive no such thing, and so can't estimate the orientation of objects in this way. i appeal to your experience: when you perceive by sight the position of an object, are you ever conscious to yourself of thinking about the intersection made by the cluster of rays, or of following out the impulses they give in straight lines? to me it seems evident that crossing and tracing of the rays is never thought on by children, by idiots, or indeed by anyone who hasn't studied optics. as for the possibility of the mind's judging the orientation of objects by those things without perceiving them, or perceiving them without knowing it to me those are equally incomprehensible. and there's another point: explaining vision by the example of crossed sticks and hunting for the object along the axes of the clusters of rays presupposes that the proper objects of sight are perceived at a distance, and i have demonstrated that they are not.

it remains, therefore, that we look for some other explication of this difficulty: and i believe it not impossible to find one, provided we examine it to the bottom, and carefully distinguish between the ideas of sight and touch; which cannot be too oft inculcated in treating of vision: but more especially throughout the consideration of this affair we ought to carry that distinction in our thoughts: for that from want of a right understanding thereof the difficulty of explaining erect vision seems chiefly to arise.
so we have to look for some other explanation of this difficulty. i think we can find one, if we examine it to the bottom and something that can't be too often emphasised in treating of vision carefully distinguish the ideas of sight from the ideas of touch. we need to carry that distinction in our thoughts constantly when considering this matter, because the failure to understand it properly seems to be the main source of the difficulty of explaining erect vision.

in order to disentangle our minds from whatever prejudices we may entertain with relation to the subject in hand, nothing seems more apposite than the taking into our thoughts the case of one born blind, and afterwards, when grown up, made to see. and though, perhaps, it may not be an easy task to divest ourselves entirely of the experience received from sight, so as to be able to put our thoughts exactly in the posture of such a one's, we must, nevertheless, as far as possible, endeavour to frame true conceptions of what might reasonably be supposed to pass in his mind.
to disentangle our minds from whatever prejudices we may have concerning this subject, nothing seems more appropriate than think about the case of someone who was born blind and then as an adult becomes able to see. it may be hard for us to divest ourselves entirely of the experience we have received from sight, so as to put our thoughts exactly into the posture of this man's, but we must do our best to form true conceptions of what might reasonably be supposed to pass in his mind.

it is certain that a man actually blind, and who had continued so from his birth, would by the sense of feeling attain to have ideas of upper and lower. by the motion of his hand he might discern the situation of any tangible object placed within his fi reach. that part on which he felt himself supported, or towards which he perceived his body to gravitate, he would term lower, and the contrary to this upper; and accordingly denominate whatsoever objects he touched.
it is certain that a man who had been blind from birth would through his sense of feeling come to have ideas of upper and lower. by the motion of his hand he could discern the orientation of any tangible object placed within his reach. the part on which he felt himself supported, or towards which he perceived his body to gravitate, he would term lower and the opposite to this upper, and label in the same way the parts of any objects he touched.

but then, whatever judgments he makes concerning the situation of objects are confined to those only that are perceivable by touch. all those things that are intangible and of a spiritual nature, his thoughts and desires, his passions, and in general all the modifications of the soul, to these he would never apply the terms upper and lower, except only in a metaphorical sense. he may, perhaps, by way of allusion, speak of high or low thoughts: but those terms in their proper signification would never be applied to anything that was not conceived to exist without the mind. for a man born blind, and remaining in the same state, could mean nothing else by the words higher and lower than a greater or lesser distance from the earth; which distance he would measure by the motion or application of his hand or some other part of his body. it is therefore evident that all those things which, in respect of each other, would by him be thought higher or lower, must be such as were conceived to exist without his mind, in the ambient space.
but then the only judgments he makes about the orientation of objects would concern ones that are perceivable by touch. things that are intangible and of a spiritual nature his thoughts and desires, his passions, and in general all the states of his soul he would never describe in terms of upper and lower, except in a purely metaphorical sense. he might by way of allusion speak of high or low thoughts, but those words in their proper meanings would never be applied to anything that wasn't conceived to exist outside the mind. a man who was born blind and stayed blind could only use the words higher and lower to mean a larger or smaller distance from the earth; and he would measure this distance by the motion or application of his hand or some other part of his body. so it's obvious that all the things that he would think of as higher or lower than one another must be things conceived to exist in the surrounding space outside his mind.

whence it plainly follows that such a one, if we suppose him made to see, would not at first sight think anything he saw was high or low, erect or inverted; for it hath been already demonstrated in sect. 41 that he would not think the things he perceived by sight to be at any distance from him, or without his mind. the objects to which he had hitherto been used to apply the terms up and down, high and low, were such only as affected or were some way perceived by his couch: but the proper objects of vision make a new set of ideas, perfectly distinct and different from the former, and which can in no sort make themselves perceived by touch. there is, therefore, nothing at all that could induce him to think those terms applicable to them: nor would he ever think it till such time as he had observed their connexion with tangible objects, and the same prejudice began to insinuate itself into his understanding, which from their infancy had grown up in the understandings of other men.
from which it plainly follows that if this man were enabled to see, he wouldn't at first sight think of anything he saw as being high or low, erect or inverted; for i have demonstrated in 41 that he wouldn't think the things he perceived by sight to be at any distance from him or outside his mind. the objects that he has until now described in terms of up and down, high and low, have been ones that were in some way perceived by his sense of touch. but the proper objects of vision constitute a new set of ideas that are nothing like those former ones and can't possibly be perceived by touch. so there is nothing that could induce him to think those words to be terms applicable to them; and he wouldn't think this until he came to observe their connection with tangible objects, and the same prejudice began to insinuate itself into his understanding that had grown up in the understandings of other men from their infancy.

to set this matter in a clearer light i shall make use of an example. suppose the above-mentioned blind person by his touch perceives a man to stand erect. let us inquire into the manner of this. by the application of his hand to the several parts of a human body he had perceived different tangible ideas, which being collected into sundry complex ones, have distinct names annexed to them. thus one combination of a certain tangible figure, bulk, and consistency of parts is called the head, another the hand, a third the foot, and so of the rest: all which complex ideas could, in his understanding, be made up only of ideas perceivable by touch. he had also by his touch obtained an idea of earth or ground, towards which he perceives the parts of his body to have a natural tendency. now, by erect nothing more being meant than that perpendicular position of a man wherein his feet are nearest to the earth, if the blind person by moving his hand over the parts of the man who stands before him perceives the tangible ideas that compose the head to be farthest from, and those that compose the feet to be nearest to, that other combination of tangible ideas which he calls earth, he will denominate that man erect. but if we suppose him on a sudden to receive his sight, and that he behold a man standing before him, it is evident in that case he would neither judge the man he sees to be erect nor inverted; for he never having known those terms applied to any other save tangible things, or which existed in the space without him, and what he sees neither being tangible nor perceived as existing without, he could not know that in propriety of language they were applicable to it.
to set this matter in a clearer light, here is an example. suppose that our blind man, by his touch, perceives a man to stand erect. let us inquire into how this happens. by applying his hand to the various parts of a human body he perceived different tangible ideas which, being collected into various complex ones, have distinct names annexed to them. thus one combination of a certain tangible shape, size and consistency of parts is called the head, another the hand, a third the foot, and so on. these complex ideas in his understanding would have to be made up only of ideas perceivable by touch. he also obtained by touch an idea of earth or ground, which he perceives the parts of his body to have a natural tendency to move towards. now, all that is meant by erect is the perpendicular position of a man in which his feet are nearest to the earth; so if the blind person by moving his hand over the parts of the man who stands before him perceives the tangible ideas that compose the head to be furthest from that other combination of tangible ideas that he calls earth, and perceives the tangible ideas that compose the feet to be nearest to it, he will describe that man as erect. but if we suppose him suddenly to receive his sight and to see a man standing before him, it's obvious that he wouldn't judge the man he sees to be erect or inverted. he has never known those terms applied to any but tangible things, or existing in the space outside him, and what he sees is neither tangible nor perceived as existing outside him, so he can't know that in propriety of language they are applicable to it.

afterwards, when upon turning his head or eyes up and down to the right and left he shall observe the visible objects to change, and shall also attain to know that they are called by the same names, and connected with the objects perceived by touch; then indeed he will come to speak of them and their situation, in the same terms that he has been used to apply to tangible things; and those that he perceives by turning up his eyes he will call upper, and those that by turning down his eyes he will call lower.
afterwards, when upon turning his head or eyes up and down to the right and left he observes the visible objects to change, and also comes to know that they are connected with the objects perceived by touch and called by the same names as them, then indeed he will come to speak of them and their orientation in the same terms that he has been used to applying to tangible things: those that he perceives by turning up his eyes he will call upper, and those he perceives by turning down his eyes he will call lower.

and this seems to me the true reason why he should think those objects uppermost that are painted on the lower part of his eye: for by turning the eye up they shall be distinctly seen; as likewise those that are painted on the highest part of the eye shall be distinctly seen by turning the eye down, and are for that reason esteemed lowest; for we have shown that to the immediate objects of sight considered in themselves, he would not attribute the terms high and low. it must therefore be on account of some circumstances which are observed to attend them: and these, it is plain, are the actions of turning the eye up and down, which suggest a very obvious reason why the mind should denominate the objects of sight accordingly high or low. and without this motion of the eye, this turning it up and down in order to discern different objects, doubtless erect, inverse, and other the like terms relating to the position of tangible objects, would never have been transferred, or in any degree apprehended to belong to the ideas of sight: the mere act of seeing including nothing in it to that purpose; whereas the different situations of the eye naturally direct the mind to make a suitable judgment of the situation of objects intromitted by it.
this seems to me the true reason for him to think that the objects painted on the lower part of his eye are uppermost: he'll see them distinctly by turning his eye up. and he'll think that the objects painted on the lower part of his eye are lowest because he'll see them distinctly by turning his eye down. i have shown that he would not apply the terms high and low to the immediate objects of sight considered in themselves, so he must be guided by some circumstances that are observed to accompany them; and it's clear that these are the actions of turning the eye up and down, which suggest a very obvious reason for the mind to call the objects of sight high or low correspondingly. without this motion of the eye , it would never have occurred to him to apply to the ideas of sight such terms as erect, inverted and the like which he has understood in terms of the position of tangible objects. the mere act of seeing includes nothing in it to that purpose; whereas the different situations of the eye naturally direct the mind to make a suitable judgment of the orientation of objects presented by it.

farther, when he has by experience learned the connexion there is between the several ideas of sight and touch, he will be able, by the perception he has of the situation of visible things in respect of one another, to make a sudden and true estimate of the situation of outward, tangible things corresponding to them. and thus it is he shall perceive by sight the situation of external objects which do not properly fall under that sense.
furthermore, when he has learned by experience the connection between the various ideas of sight and of touch, he will be able from his perception of the situation of visible things in relation to one another to make a sudden and true estimate of the orientation of external tangible things corresponding to them. that's how he will perceive by sight the orientation of external objects that don't strictly fall under that sense.

i know we are very prone to think that, if just made to see, we should judge of the situation of visible things as we do now: but we are also as prone to think that, at first sight, we should in the same way apprehend the distance and magnitude of objects as we do now: which hath been shown to be a false and groundless persuasion. and for the like reasons the same censure may be passed on the positive assurance that most men, before they have thought sufficiently of the matter, might have of their being able to determine by the eye at first view, whether objects were erect or inverse.
i know that we're very apt to think that if we had just this moment gained eyesight we should judge concerning the orientation of visible things as we do now. but we're equally apt to think that at first sight we would apprehend the distance and size of objects as we do now; and i have shown that this opinion is false and groundless. well, so is the confident opinion that most men have (before they have thought hard enough) that they could determine by the eye at first view whether objects were erect or inverted.

it will, perhaps, be objected co our opinion that a man, for instance, being thought erect when his feet are next the earth, and inverted when his head is next the earth, it doth hence follow that by the mere act of vision, without any experience or altering the situation of the eye, we should have determined whether he were erect or inverted: for both the earth itself, and the limbs of the man who stands thereon, being equally perceived by sight, one cannot choose seeing what part of the man is nearest the earth, and what part farthest from it, i.e. whether he be erect or inverted.
you might want to object against my opinion in the following way. a man is thought to be erect when his feet are next to the earth, and inverted when his head is next to the earth; so we could determine by the mere act of vision whether he was erect or inverted, without any experience or altering the situation of the eye. the earth itself and the limbs of the man standing on it are both perceived by sight, so one can't help seeing what part of the man is nearest to the earth and what part furthest from it, i.e. seeing whether he is erect or inverted.

to which i answer, the ideas which constitute the tangible earth and man are entirely different from those which constitute the visible earth and man. nor was it possible, by virtue of the visive faculty alone, without superadding any experience of touch, or altering the position of the eye, ever to have known, or so much as suspected, there had been any relation or connexion between them. hence a man at first view would not denominate anything he saw earth, or head, or foot; and consequently he could not tell by the mere act of vision whether the head or feet were nearest the earth: nor, indeed, would we have thereby any thought of earth or man, erect or inverse, at all: which will be made yet more evident if we nicely observe, and make a particular comparison between, the ideas of both senses.
to which i reply that the ideas that constitute the tangible earth and man are entirely different from those that constitute the visible earth and man. using the visual faculty alone, without bringing in any experience of touch or altering the position of the eye, one couldn't know one couldn't have any reason even to suspect that there was any relation or connection between them. a man at first view wouldn't call anything he saw earth or head or foot; so he couldn't tell by the mere act of vision whether the head or feet were nearest the earth. indeed, unaided eyesight wouldn't have given us any thought of earth or man, erect or inverted; and that will be made yet more evident if we look in careful detail into the differences between the ideas of sight and of touch.

that which i see is only variety of light and colours. that which i feel is hard or soft, hot or cold, rough or smooth. what similitude, what connexion have those ideas with these? or how is it possible that anyone should see reason to give one and the same name to combinations of ideas so very different before he had experienced their coexistence? we do not find there is any necessary connexion betwixt this or that tangible quality and any colour whatsoever. and we may sometimes perceive colours where there is nothing to be felt. all which doth make it manifest that no man, at first receiving of his sight, would know there was any agreement between this or that particular object of his sight and any object of touch he had been already acquainted with: the colours, therefore, of the head would to him no more suggest the idea of head than they would the idea of foot.
what i see is only a variety of light and colours. what i feel is hard or soft, hot or cold, rough or smooth. what similarity, what connection, does one set of ideas have with the other? how could anyone see reason to give one and the same name to combinations of ideas that are so very different, before he had experienced their coexistence? we don't find any necessary connection between this or that tangible quality and any colour whatsoever. and we may sometimes perceive colours where there is nothing to be felt. all of which makes it obvious that no man on first receiving his sight would know that there was any agreement between this or that particular object of his sight and any object of touch that he was already acquainted with. the colours of the head wouldn't suggest to him the idea of head any more than they would the idea of foot.

farther, we have at large shown (vid. sect. 63 and 64) there is no discoverable necessary connexion between any given visible magnitude and any one particular tangible magnitude; but that it is entirely the result of custom and experience, and depends on foreign and accidental circumstances that we can by the perception of visible extension inform ourselves what may be the extension of any tangible object connected with it. hence it is certain that neither the visible magnitude of head or foot would bring along with them into the mind, at first opening of the eyes, the respective tangible magnitudes of those parts.
you might think that the visible sizes of head and foot would bring into the mind, at first opening of the eyes, the respective tangible sizes of those parts. not so. i have at large shown (see 63-64) there is no discoverable necessary connection between any given visible size and any one particular tangible size; that our ability by the perception of visible extension to inform ourselves regarding the extension of any tangible object is entirely the result of custom and experience.

by the foregoing section it is plain the visible figure of any part of the body hath no necessary connexion with the tangible figure thereof, so as at first sight to suggest it to the mind. for figure is the termination of magnitude; whence it follows that no visible magnitude having in its own nature an aptness to suggest any one particular tangible magnitude, so neither can any visible figure be inseparably connected with its corresponding tangible figure: so as of itself and in a way prior to experience, it might suggest it to the understanding. this will be farther evident if we consider that what seems smooth and round to the touch may to sight, if viewed through a microscope, seem quite otherwise.
that line of thought makes it clear that the visible shape of any part of the body has no necessary connection with its tangible shape, so as to suggest it to the mind at first sight. shape is the termination of size; from which it follows that because no visible size has in its own nature an aptness to suggest any one particular tangible size, no visible shape can be inseparably connected with its corresponding tangible shape in such a way as to suggest the latter without relying on experience. this becomes even more obvious if we consider that what seems smooth and round to the touch may seem quite otherwise to sight if viewed through a microscope.

from all which laid together and duly considered, we may clearly deduce this inference. in the first act of vision no idea entering by the eye would have a perceivable connexion with the ideas to which the names earth, man, head, foot, etc., were annexed in the understanding of a person blind from his birth; so as in any sort to introduce them into his mind, or make themselves be called by the same names, and reputed the same things with them, as afterwards they come to be.
the points that i have made, when properly assembled and considered, clearly imply the following conclusion. in the first act of vision no idea entering by the eye would have a perceivable connection with the ideas to which the names earth, man, head, foot etc. were linked in the mind of a person blind from birth so as to introduce them into his mind and get him to call them by the same names as he will apply to them later after experience has come to his aid.

there doth, nevertheless, remain one difficulty, which perhaps may seem to press hard on our opinion, and deserve not to be passed over: for though it be granted that neither the colour, size, nor figure of the visible feet have any necessary connexion with the ideas that compose the tangible feet, so as to bring them at first sight into my mind, or make me in danger of confounding them before i had been used to, and for some time experienced their connexion: yet thus much seems undeniable, namely, that the number of the visible feet being the same with that of the tangible feet, i may from hence without any experience of sight reasonably conclude that they represent or are connected with the feet rather than the head. i say, it seems the idea of two visible feet will sooner suggest to the mind the idea of two tangible feet than of one head; so that the blind man upon first reception of the visive faculty might know which were the feet or two, and which the head or one.
but there's still one difficulty that may seem to press hard on my opinion and to deserve to be considered. even granted that neither the colour, size, or shape of the visible feet have any necessary connection with the ideas that compose the tangible feet, it seems undeniable that because the number of the visible feet is the same as the number of the tangible feet i may without any help from experience reasonably conclude that they represent or are connected with the feet rather than the head. that is: it seems the idea of two visible feet will suggest to the mind the idea of two tangible feet rather than of one head; so that the blind man when he first begins to see might know which were the feet (or two) and which was the head (or one).

in order to get clear of this seeming difficulty we need only observe that diversity of visible objects doth not necessarily infer diversity of tangible objects corresponding to them. a picture painted with great variety of colours affects the touch in one uniform manner; it is therefore evident that i do not by any necessary consecution, independent of experience, judge of the number of things tangible from the number of things visible. i should not, therefore, at first opening my eyes conclude that because i see two i shall feel two. how, therefore, can i, before experience teaches me, know that the visible legs, because two, are connected with the tangible legs, or the visible head, because one, is connected with the tangible head? the truth is, the things i see are so very different and heterogeneous from the things i feel that the perception of the one would never have suggested the other to my thoughts, or enabled me to pass the least judgment thereon, until i had experienced their connexion.
to get clear of this seeming difficulty we need only observe that diversity of visible objects doesn't necessarily imply diversity of corresponding tangible objects. a picture painted with great variety of colours affects the sense of touch in one uniform manner; which shows that i don't by any necessary connection independently of experience judge the number of tangible things from the number of visible things. so when i first open my eyes i ought not to conclude that because i see two i shall feel two. so how can i, without being taught by experience, know that the visible legs, because two, are connected with the tangible legs, or that the visible head, because one, is connected with the tangible head? the things i see are so very different and heterogeneous from the things i feel that the perception of the one would never have suggested the other to my thoughts, or enabled me to pass the least judgment on them, until i had experienced their connection.

but for a fuller illustration of this matter it ought to be considered that number (however some may reckon it amongst the primary qualities) is nothing fixed and settled, really existing in things themselves. it is entirely the creature of the mind, considering either an idea by itself, or any combination of ideas to which it gives one name, and so makes it pass for an unit. according as the mind variously combines its ideas the unit varies: and as the unit, so the number, which is only a collection of units, doth also vary. we call a window one, a chimney one, and yet a house in which there are many windows and many chimneys hath an equal right to be called one, and many houses go to the making of the city. in these and the like, instances it is evident the unit constantly relates to the particular draughts the mind makes of its ideas, to which it affixes names, and wherein it includes more or less as best suits its own ends and purposes. whatever, therefore, the mind considers as one, that is an unit. every combination of ideas is considered as one thing by the mind, and in token thereof is marked by one name. now, this naming and combining together of ideas is perfectly arbitrary, and done by the mind in such sort as experience shows it to be most convenient: without which our ideas had never been collected into such sundry distinct combinations as they now are.
for a fuller illustration of this matter, considered the following. although some regard number as one of the primary qualities, it is in fact nothing fixed and settled, not something really existing in things themselves. it is entirely the creature of the mind, considering a single idea or any combination of ideas to which it gives one name and so makes it pass for a unit. according as the mind variously combines its ideas, the unit varies; and as the unit varies, so does the number, which is only a collection of units. we call a window one, a chimney one, and yet a house with many windows and many chimneys has an equal right to be called one, and many houses go to the making of one city. examples like these show that the unit constantly relates to the particular drafts the mind makes of its ideas, to which it attaches names and in which it includes more or less as best suits its own purposes. thus, whatever the mind considers as one is a unit. every combination of ideas is considered as one thing by the mind, and accordingly is marked by one name. this naming and combining together of ideas is perfectly arbitrary, and done by the mind in whatever way experience shows to be most convenient. without experience our ideas would never have been collected into such distinct combinations as they now are.

hence it follows that a man born blind and afterwards, when grown up, made to see, would not in the first act of vision parcel out the ideas of sight into the same distinct collections that others do, who have experienced which do regularly coexist and are proper to be bundled up together under one name. he would not, for example, make into one complex idea, and thereby esteem an unit, all those particular ideas which constitute the visible head or foot. for there can be no reason assigned why he should do so, barely upon his seeing a man stand upright before him. there crowd into his mind the ideas which compose the visible man, in company with all the other ideas of sight perceived at the same time: but all these ideas offered at once to his view, he would not distribute into sundry distinct combinations till such time as by observing the motion of the parts of the man and other experiences he comes to know which are to be separated and which to be collected together.
it follows that a man born blind and then as an adult made to see would not in his first act of vision parcel out the ideas of sight into the same distinct collections as do others who have experienced which collections regularly coexist and are appropriate for being bundled up together under one name. he would not, for example, make into one complex idea and regard as one thing all the particular ideas that constitute the visible head or foot. there's no reason for him to do so simply from seeing a man stand upright before him. there crowd into his mind the ideas that compose the visible man along with all the other visual ideas perceived at the same time; but he would not sort these ideas into distinct combinations until experience, e.g. observing the motion of the parts of the man, teaches him which are to be separated and which to be collected together.

from what hath been premised it is plain the objects of sight and touch make, if i may so say, two sets of ideas which are widely different from each other. to objects of either kind we indifferently attribute the terms high and low, right and left, and suchlike, denoting the position or situation of things: but then we must well observe that the position of any object is determined with respect only to objects of the same sense. we say any object of touch is high or low, according as it is more or less distant from the tangible earth: and in like manner we denominate any object of sight high or low in proportion as it is more or less distant from the visible earth: but to define the situation of visible things with relation to the distance they bear from any tangible thing, or vice versa, this were absurd and perfectly unintelligible. for all visible things are equally in the mind, and take up no part of the external space: and consequently are equidistant from any tangible thing which exists without the mind.
from all this it emerges that the objects of sight and of touch make, if i may so say, two sets of ideas that are widely different from each other. to objects of either kind we attribute the terms high and low, right and left, and such like, denoting the position or orientation of things; but we must well observe that the position of any object is determined with respect only to objects of the same sense. we call an object of touch high or low according as it is more or less distant from the tangible earth; and we denominate an object of sight high or low in proportion as it is more or less distant from the visible earth. but to define the location of visible things in terms of their distance from tangible things, or vice versa, would be absurd and perfectly unintelligible. all visible things are equally in the mind, and take up no part of the external space; so they are equidistant from any tangible thing that exists outside the mind.

or rather, to speak truly, the proper objects of sight are at no distance, neither near nor far, from any tangible thing. for if we inquire narrowly into the matter we shall find that those things only are compared together in respect of distance which exist after the same manner, or appertain unto the same sense. for by the distance between any two points nothing more is meant than the number of intermediate points: if the given points are visible the distance between them is marked out by the number of the interjacent visible points: if they are tangible, the distance between them is a line consisting of tangible points; but if they are one tangible and the other visible, the distance between them doth neither consist of points perceivable by sight nor by touch, i.e. it is utterly inconceivable. this, perhaps, will not find an easy admission into all men's understanding: however, i should gladly be informed whether it be not true by anyone who will be at the pains to reflect a little and apply it home to his thoughts.
or rather, to speak truly, the proper objects of sight are at no distance neither near nor far from any tangible thing. for if we look into this carefully we'll find that the only things that are inter-related in terms of distance are ones that exist in the same way or belong to the same sense. all that is meant by the distance between x and y is the number of intermediate points between x and y. if x and y are visible, the distance between them is the number of the intervening visible points; if they are tangible the distance between them is a line consisting of tangible points; but if x is tangible and y is visible, the distance between them is utterly inconceivable.

the not observing what has been delivered in the two last sections seems to have occasioned no small part of the difficulty that occurs in the business of erect appearances. the head, which is painted nearest the earth, seems to be farthest from it: and on the other hand the feet, which are painted farthest from the earth, are thought nearest to it. herein lies the difficulty, which vanishes if we express the thing more clearly and free from ambiguity, thus: how comes it that to the eye the visible head which is nearest the tangible earth seems farthest from the earth, and the visible feet, which are farthest from the tangible earth seem nearest the earth? the question being thus proposed, who sees not the difficulty is founded on a supposition that the eye, or visive faculty, or rather the soul by means thereof, should judge of the situation of visible objects with reference to their distance from the tangible earth? whereas it is evident the tangible earth is not perceived by sight: and it hath been shown in the two last preceding sections that the location of visible objects is determined only by the distance they bear from one another; and that it is nonsense to talk of distance, far or near, between a visible and tangible thing.
the head, which is painted on the retina nearest the earth, seems to be furthest from it; and the feet, which are painted furthest from the earth, are thought nearest to it. now let us express this more clearly and without ambiguity: how does it happen that the visible head, which is nearest to the tangible earth, seems to the eye furthest from the earth? and that the visible feet, which are furthest from the tangible earth, seem to the eye nearest to the earth? when the question is put like that, anyone can see that the difficulty is based on the supposition that the eye or eyesight or rather the soul by means of eyesight should judge the situation of visible objects in terms of their distance from the tangible earth! obviously the tangible earth is not perceived by sight. and i have shown in 111-112 that the location of visible objects is determined only by their distance from one another, and that it is nonsense to talk of distance, far or near, between a visible and a tangible thing.

if we confine our thoughts to the proper objects of sight, the whole is plain and easy. the head is painted farthest from, and the feet nearest to, the visible earth; and so they appear to be. what is there strange or unaccountable in this? let us suppose the pictures in the fund of the eye to be the immediate objects of the sight. the consequence is that things should appear in the same posture they are painted in; and is it not so? the head which is seen seems farthest from the earth which is seen; and the feet which are seen seem nearest to the earth, which is seen; and just so they are painted.
if we confine our thoughts to the proper objects of sight the whole thing is plain and easy. the head is painted furthest from the visible earth and the feet nearest to it; and so they appear to be. what is there strange or unaccountable in this? let us suppose the pictures in the retina to be the immediate objects of the sight. the consequence is that things should appear in the same posture they are painted in and isn't it so? the head that is seen seems furthest from the earth that is seen; and the feet that are seen seem nearest to the earth that is seen; and just so they are painted.

but, say you, the picture of the man is inverted, and yet the appearance is erect: i ask, what mean you by the picture of the man, or, which is the same thing, the visible man's being inverted? you tell me it is inverted, because the heels are uppermost and the head undermost? explain me this. you say that by the head's being undermost you mean that it is nearest to the earth; and by the heels being uppermost that they are farthest from the earth. i ask again what earth you mean? you cannot mean the earth that is painted on the eye, or the visible earth: for the picture of the head is farthest from the picture of the earth, and the picture of the feet nearest to the picture of the earth; and accordingly the visible head is farthest from the visible earth, and the visible feet nearest to it. it remains, therefore, that you mean the tangible earth, and so determine the situation of visible things with respect to tangible things; contrary to what hath been demonstrated in sect. 111 and 112. the two distinct provinces of sight and touch should be considered apart, and as if their objects had no intercourse, no manner of relation one to another, in point of distance or position.
you object: the picture of the man is inverted, yet the appearance is erect. what do you mean by the picture of the man? or, the same question, what do you mean by the visible man's being inverted? you tell me that it's inverted because the heels are uppermost and the head undermost? explain this to me. you say that by the head's being undermost you mean that it is nearest to the earth; and by the heels being uppermost you mean that they are furthest from the earth. what earth do you mean? you can't mean the earth that is painted on the eye, or the visible earth; because the picture of the head is furthest from the picture of the earth, and the picture of the feet nearest to the picture of the earth; so the visible head is furthest from the visible earth, and the visible feet nearest to it. so it must be that you mean the tangible earth, and are determining the orientation of visible things in relation to tangible things contrary to what i demonstrated in 111-112. the provinces of sight and touch should be considered apart, as if their objects had no sort of relation to one another in regard to distance or position.

farther, what greatly contributes to make us mistake in this matter is that when we think of the pictures in the fund of the eye, we imagine ourselves looking on the fund of another's eye, or another looking on the fund of our own eye, and beholding the pictures painted thereon. suppose two eyes a and b: a from some distance looking on the pictures in b sees them inverted, and for that reason concludes they are inverted in b: but this is wrong. there are projected in little on the bottom of a the images of the pictures of, suppose, man, earth, etc., which are painted on b. and besides these the eye b itself, and the objects which environ it, together with another earth, are projected in a larger size on a. now, by the eye a these larger images are deemed the true objects, and the lesser only pictures in miniature. and it is with respect to those greater images that it determines the situation of the smaller images: so that comparing the little man with the great earth, a judges him inverted, or that the feet are farthest from and the head nearest to the great earth. whereas, if a compare the little man with the little earth, then he will appear erect, i.e. his head shall seem farthest from, and his feet nearest to, the little earth. but we must consider that b does not see two earths as a does: it sees only what is represented by the little pictures in a, and consequently shall judge the man erect. for, in truth, the man in b is not inverted, for there the feet are next the earth; but it is the representation of it in a which is inverted, for there the head of the representation of the picture of the man in b is next the earth, and the feet farthest from the earth, meaning the earth which is without the representation of the pictures in b. for if you take the little images of the pictures in b, and consider them by themselves, and with respect only to one another, they are all erect and in their natural posture.
something that greatly contributes to our going wrong about this matter is that when we think of the pictures in the retina we imagine ourselves looking at the retina of someone else's eye, or someone else looking at the retina of our own eye, and seeing the pictures painted thereon. suppose two eyes a and b: a from some distance looks at the pictures in b, sees them inverted, and concludes that they are inverted in b. but this is wrong. at the back of a there are small images of the pictures of (let's say) man, earth, etc. that are painted on b. and besides these small images a also contains larger images of the eye b itself and the objects around it, together with another earth. now, the eye a regards these larger images as the true objects, and the smaller ones as only pictures in miniature. and it is with respect to those larger images that a determines the orientation of the smaller images: relating the small man to the large earth, a judges him to be inverted, i.e. judges that the feet are furthest from the large earth and the head is nearest to it. whereas if a relates the small man to the small earth, then he will appear erect, i.e. his head will seem furthest from the small earth and his feet nearest to it. but b doesn't see two earths as a does; it sees only what is represented by the small pictures in a, and consequently it will judge the man to be erect. the fact is that the man in b is not inverted, for in the feet are next to the earth. what is inverted is the representation of this in a, because in a the head of the representation of the picture of the man in b is next to the earth, and the feet furthest from the earth, meaning the earth that is outside the representation of the pictures in b. for if you take the small images of the pictures in b and consider them by themselves only in relation to one another, they are all erect and in their natural posture.

farther, there lies a mistake in our imagining that the pictures of external objects are painted on the bottom of the eye. it hath been shown there is no resemblance between the ideas of sight and things tangible. it hath likewise been demonstrated that the proper objects of sight do not exist without the mind. whence it clearly follows that the pictures painted on the bottom of the eye are not the pictures of external objects. let anyone consult his own thoughts, and then say what affinity, what likeness there is between that certain variety and disposition of colours which constitute the visible man, or picture of a man, and that other combination of far different ideas, sensible by touch, which compose the tangible man. but if this be the case, how come they to be accounted pictures or images, since that supposes them to copy or represent some originals or other?
and there's a further mistake in imagining that the pictures of external objects are painted at the back of the eye. i have shown that the ideas of sight have no resemblance to tangible things, and that that the proper objects of sight don't exist outside the mind. from this it clearly follows that the pictures painted at the back of the eye are not pictures of external objects. consult your own thoughts, and then say what likeness there is between that particular variety and layout of colours that constitute the visible man, or picture of a man, and that other combination of far different ideas, sensible by touch, that make up the tangible man. but you may object if there's no likeness, how do they come to be regarded as pictures or images, which implies that they copy or represent some originals?

to which i answer: in the forementioned instance the eye a takes the little images, included within the representation of the other eye b, to be pictures or copies, whereof the archetypes are not things existing without, but the larger pictures projected on its own fund: and which by a are not thought pictures, but the originals, or true things themselves. though if we suppose a third eye c from a due distance to behold the fund of a, then indeed the things projected thereon shall, to c, seem pictures or images in the same sense that those projected on b do to a.
i answer that in the above example the eye a takes the small images that are included within the representation of the other eye b to be pictures or copies, but what they are picture of are not external things but the larger pictures on a's own retina; and a regards these not as pictures but as the originals. though if we suppose a third eye c to see the retina of a from an appropriate distance, then the things projected onto it will seem to c to be pictures or images, in the same sense that the ones projected onto b's retina seem to a.

rightly to conceive this point we must carefully distinguish between the ideas of sight and touch, between the visible and tangible eye; for certainly on the tangible eye nothing either is or seems to be painted. again, the visible eye, as well as all other visible objects, hath been shown to exist only in the mind, which perceiving its own ideas, and comparing them together, calls some pictures in respect of others. what hath been said, being rightly comprehended and laid together, doth, i think, afford a full and genuine explication of the erect appearance of objects; which phenomenon, i must confess, i do not see how it can be explained by any theories of vision hitherto made public.
rightly to conceive this point, we must carefully distinguish between the ideas of sight and touch, between the visible and tangible eye, for certainly nothing is or seems to be painted on the tangible eye. and the visible eye like all other visible objects has been shown to exist only in the mind, which perceives its own ideas and relates them to one another, calling some of them pictures of others. what i have said, when all put together and rightly comprehended, does (i think) offer a full and genuine explanation of the erect appearance of objects; and i must confess that i don't see how that phenomenon can be explained by any theories of vision published before mine.

in treating of these things the use of language is apt to occasion some obscurity and confusion, and create in us wrong ideas; for language being accommodated to the common notions and prejudices of men, it is scarce possible to deliver the naked and precise truth without great circumlocution, impropriety, and (to an unwary reader) seeming contradictions; i do therefore once for all desire whoever shall think it worth his while to understand what i have written concerning vision, that he would not stick in this or that phrase, or manner of expression, but candidly collect my meaning from the whole sum and tenor of my discourse, and laying aside the words as much as possible, consider the bare notions themselves, and then judge whether they are agreeable to truth and his own experience, or no.
in discussing these things the use of language is apt to cause some obscurity and confusion, and create wrong ideas in us. because language is accommodated to the common notions and prejudices of men, it is hardly possible to deliver the naked and precise truth without great circumlocution, impropriety, and (to an unwary reader) seeming contradictions. so if you think it is worth your while to understand what i have written concerning vision, i now ask you once for all not to pick on this or that phrase or manner of expression, but fairly collect my meaning from the whole sum and tenor of my discourse. lay aside the words as much as possible, consider the bare notions themselves, and then judge whether they are in conformity with truth and your own experience.

we have shown the way wherein the mind by mediation of visible ideas doth perceive or apprehend the distance, magnitude and situation of tangible objects. we come now to inquire more particularly concerning the difference between the ideas of sight and touch, which are called by the same names, and see whether there be any idea common to both senses. from what we have at large set forth and demonstrated in the foregoing parts of this treatise, it is plain there is no one selfsame numerical extension perceived both by sight and touch; but that the particular figures and extensions perceived by sight, however they may be called by the same names and reputed the same things with those perceived by touch, are nevertheless different, and have an existence distinct and separate from them: so that the question is not now concerning the same numerical ideas, but whether there be any one and the same sort of species of ideas equally perceivable to both senses; or, in other words, whether extension, figure, and motion perceived by sight are not specifically distinct from extension, figure, and motion perceived by touch.
i have shown how the mind by the mediation of visible ideas perceives the distance, size, and orientation of tangible objects. i come now to inquire in more detail into the difference between the ideas of sight and of touch that are called by the same names, to discover whether there is any idea common to both senses. from what i have presented and demonstrated in the earlier parts of this treatise, it's clearly the case that: no one extension is perceived both by sight and touch. particular shapes and extensions perceived by sight are called by the same names as those perceived by touch, and are thought to be the same things, but in fact they are different things and have an existence distinct and separate from them. so my present question is not whether sight and touch have any one individual idea in common but whether there is any any one sort or species of ideas equally perceivable to both senses? i.e. whether extension, shape, and motion perceived by sight are specifically distinct from extension, shape, and motion perceived by touch?

but before i come more particularly to discuss this matter, i find it proper to consider extension in abstract: for of this there is much talk, and i am apt to think that when men speak of extension as being an idea common to two senses, it is with a secret supposition that we can single out extension from all other tangible and visible qualities, and form thereof an abstract idea, which idea they will have common both to sight and touch. we are therefore to understand by extension in abstract an idea of extension, for instance, a line or surface entirely stripped of all other sensible qualities and circumstances that might determine it to any particular existence; it is neither black nor white, nor red, nor hath it any colour at all, or any tangible quality whatsoever and consequently it is of no finite determinate magnitude: for that which bounds or distinguishes one extension from another is some quality or circumstance wherein they disagree.
but before i get into that i think i should consider extension in abstract. there is much talk of this, and i'm inclined to think that when men speak of extension as being an idea common to two senses they are secretly supposing that we can single out extension from all other tangible and visible qualities, and form an abstract idea of it that is common both to sight and touch. so we are to understand by extension in abstract an idea of extension e.g. a surface entirely stripped of all other sensible qualities and circumstances that could fix it as being of any particular kind: it is not black or white or red or any other colour; and it has no tangible quality whatsoever. so it has no finite determinate size, because in the absence of qualitative differences there can be no boundaries or distinctions and thus no size-measurement.

now i do not find that i can perceive, imagine, or any wise frame in my mind such an abstract idea as is here spoken of. a line or surface which is neither black, nor white, nor blue, nor yellow, etc., nor long, nor short, nor rough, nor smooth, nor square, nor round, etc., is perfectly incomprehensible. this i am sure of as to myself: how far the faculties of other men may reach they best can tell.
i don't find that i can perceive, imagine, or in any way form in my mind an abstract idea such as is here spoken of. a line or surface that is not black or white or blue or yellow etc., and not long or short, rough or smooth, square or round etc., is utterly incomprehensible. i'm sure of this as regards myself; other men can best tell how far their faculties can reach.

it is commonly said that the object of geometry is abstract extension: but geometry contemplates figures: now, figure is the termination of magnitude: but we have shown that extension in abstract hath no finite determinate magnitude. whence it clearly follows that it can have no figure, and consequently is not the object of geometry. it is indeed a tenet as well of the modern as of the ancient philosophers that all general truths are concerning universal abstract ideas; without which, we are told, there could be no science, no demonstration of any general proposition in geometry. but it were no hard matter, did i think it necessary to my present purpose, to show that propositions and demonstrations in geometry might be universal, though they who make them never think of abstract general ideas of triangles or circles.
it is commonly said that the subject-matter of geometry is abstract extension. but geometry is about shapes, and shape is the termination of size; whereas i have shown that extension in abstract has no finite determinate size, from which it clearly follows that it can't have any shape and therefore isn't what geometry is about. it is indeed a tenet among the modern philosophers as well as of the ancients that all general truths are about universal abstract ideas, without which we are told there could be no science, no demonstration of any general proposition in geometry. it wouldn't be difficult to show that propositions and demonstrations in geometry could be universal without those who make them ever thinking of abstract general ideas of triangles or circles; but my present purposes don't require me to go into that.

after reiterated endeavours to apprehend the general idea a triangle, i have found it altogether incomprehensible. and surely if anyone were able to introduce that idea into my mind, it must be the author of the essay concerning human understanding; he who has so far distinguished himself from the generality of writers by the clearness and significancy of what he says. let us therefore see how this celebrated author describes the general or abstract idea of a triangle. it must be (says he) neither oblique nor rectangular, neither equilateral, equicrural, nor scalenum; but all and none of these at once. in effect, it is somewhat imperfect that cannot exist; an idea, wherein some parts of several different and inconsistent ideas are put together essay on hum. this is the idea which he thinks needful for the enlargement of knowledge, which is the subject of mathematical demonstration, and without which we could never come to know any general proposition concerning triangles. that author acknowledges it doth require some pains and skill to form this general idea of a triangle. but had he called to mind what he says in another place, to wit, that ideas of mixed modes wherein any inconsistent ideas are put together cannot so much as exist in the mind, i.e. be conceived. i say, had this occurred to his thoughts, it is not improbable he would have owned it above all the pains and skill he was master of to form the above-mentioned idea of a triangle, which is made up of manifest, staring contradictions. that a man who laid so great a stress on clear and determinate ideas should nevertheless talk at this rate seems very surprising. but the wonder will lessen if it be considered that the source whence this opinion flows is the prolific womb which has brought forth innumerable errors and difficulties in all parts of philosophy and in all the sciences: but this matter, taken in its full extent, were a subject too comprehensive to be insisted on in this place. and so much for extension in abstract.
after repeated attempts to grasp the general idea of a triangle i have found it altogether incomprehensible. if anyone could introduce that idea into my mind, it would surely be the author of the essay concerning human understanding he who has so far distinguished himself from most writers by the clearness and significance of what he says. let us see, then, how this celebrated author describes the general or abstract idea of a triangle: it must be neither oblique nor rectangular, neither equilateral, equicrural nor scalenum; but all and none of these at once. in effect it is something imperfect that cannot exist; an idea wherein some parts of several different and inconsistent ideas are put together. this is the idea that he thinks is needed for the enlargement of knowledge, is the subject of mathematical demonstration, and without which we could never come to know any general proposition about triangles. he acknowledges it does require some pains and skill to form this general idea of a triangle. if he had borne in mind what he said earlier, namely that ideas of mixed modes wherein any inconsistent ideas are put together cannot so much as exist in the mind, i.e. be conceived (essay iv.iii.10), he might well have admitted that all the pains and skill he was master of wouldn't suffice for him to form the above-mentioned idea of a triangle, which is made up of obvious glaring contradictions. that a man who thought so much and laid such stress on clear and determinate ideas should talk in this way seems very surprising. but you'll be less surprised if you consider that this opinion flows from the prolific womb that has brought forth innumerable errors and difficulties in all parts of philosophy and in all the sciences. but a full treatment of this matter is too big and inclusive a subject to to be presented here. so much for extension in abstract.

some, perhaps, may think pure space, vacuum, or trine dimension to be equally the object of sight and touch: but though we have a very great propension to think the ideas of outness and space to be the immediate object of sight, yet, if i mistake not, in the foregoing parts of this essay that hath been clearly demonstrated to be a mere delusion, arising from the quick and sudden suggestion of fancy, which so closely connects the idea of distance with those of sight, that we are apt to think it is itself a proper and immediate object of that sense till reason corrects the mistake.
some may think that pure space, vacuum, or the three dimensions are objects equally of sight and touch. but though we have a great tendency to think the ideas of outness and space are the immediate object of sight, i think that in the foregoing parts of the present work i have clearly demonstrated this to be a mere delusion. it arises from the quick and sudden suggestion of the imagination, which so closely connects the idea of distance with ideas of sight that we're apt to think it is a proper and immediate object of that sense, till reason corrects the mistake.

it having been shown that there are no abstract ideas of figure, and that it is impossible for us by any precision of thought to frame an idea of extension separate from all other visible and tangible qualities which shall be common both to sight and touch: the question now remaining is, whether the particular extensions, figures, and motions perceived by sight be of the same kind with the particular extensions, figures, and motions perceived by touch? in answer to which i shall venture to lay down the following proposition: the extension, figures, and motions perceived by sight are specifically distinct from the ideas of touch called by the same names, nor is there any such thing as one idea or kind of idea common to both senses. this proposition may without much difficulty be collected from what hath been said in several places of this essay. but because it seems so remote from, and contrary to, the received notions and settled opinion of mankind, i shall attempt to demonstrate it more particularly and at large by the following arguments.
now that i have shown that there are no abstract ideas of shape, and that it is totally impossible for us to form an idea of extension that is common both to sight and touch, and common both to sight and touch, and abstract, i.e. separate from all other visible and tangible qualities, the remaining question is this: are the particular extensions, shapes, and motions perceived by sight are of the same kind as the particular extensions, shapes, and motions perceived by touch? in answer to this i venture to lay down the following proposition: the extension, shapes, and motions perceived by sight are specifically distinct from the ideas of touch called by the same names; there is no such thing as one idea or kind of idea common to both senses. this proposition can fairly easily be gathered from things i have said in several places in this essay. but because it seems so remote from indeed, contrary to the accepted notions and settled opinion of mankind, i'll try to demonstrate it more comprehensively and in more detail by the following arguments.

when upon perception of an idea i range it under this or that sort, it is because it is perceived after the same manner, or because it has a likeness or conformity with, or affects me in the same way as, the ideas of the sort i rank it under. in short, it must not be entirely new, but have something in it old and already perceived by me. it must, i say, have so much at least in common with the ideas i have before known and named as to make me give it the same name with them. but it has been, if i mistake not, clearly made out that a man born blind would not at first reception of his sight think the things he saw were of the same nature with the objects of touch, or had anything in common with them; but that they were a new set of ideas, perceived in a new manner, and entirely different from all he had ever perceived before: so that he would not call them by the same name, nor repute them to be of the same sort with anything he had hitherto known.
when having perceived an idea i assign it to this or that sort, i do this because it is perceived in the same way as, or has a likeness or conformity with, or affects me in the same way as, other ideas of the sort i put it into. so it mustn't be entirely new; it must contain something old, something already perceived by me; it must have enough in common with the ideas i have previously known and named to make me give it the same name as them. but i think i have clearly shown that a man born blind would not, when first enabled to see, think that the things he saw were of the same nature as the objects of touch, or had anything in common with them; but would think that they were a new set of ideas, perceived in a new manner and entirely different from any he had perceived before. so that he wouldn't call them by the same name, or regard them as being of the same sort, as anything he had previously known.

secondly, light and colours are allowed by all to constitute a son or species entirely different from the ideas of touch: nor will any man, i presume, say they can make themselves perceived by that sense: but there is no other immediate object of sight besides light and colours. it is therefore a direct consequence that there is no idea common to both senses.
everyone accepts that light and colours constitute a sort or species entirely different from the ideas of touch; and i don't think anyone will say that they can be perceived by that sense. but light and colours are the only immediate object of sight; so it follows that there is no idea common to both senses.

it is a prevailing opinion, even amongst those who have thought and writ most accurately concerning our ideas and the ways whereby they enter into the understanding, that something more is perceived by sight than barely light and colours with their variations. mr. locke termeth sight, the most comprehensive of all our senses, conveying to our minds the ideas of light and colours, which are peculiar only to that sense; and also the far different ideas of space, figure, and motion. space or distance, we have shown, is not otherwise the object of sight than of hearing. and as for figure and extension, i leave it to anyone that shall calmly attend to his own clear and distinct ideas to decide whether he had any idea intromitted immediately and properly by sight save only light and colours: or whether it de possible for him to frame in his mind a distinct abstract idea of visible extension or figure exclusive of all colour: and on the other hand, whether he can conceive colour without visible extension? for my own part, i must confess i am not able to attain so great a nicety of abstraction: in a strict sense, i see nothing but light and colours, with their several shades and variations. he who beside these doth also perceive by sight ideas far different and distinct from them hath that faculty in a degree more perfect and comprehensive than i can pretend to. it must be owned that by the mediation of light and colours other far different ideas are suggested to my mind: but so they are by hearing, which beside sounds which are peculiar to that sense, doth by their mediation suggest not only space, figure, and motion, but also all other ideas whatsoever that can be signified by words.
it is a prevailing opinion, even among those who have thought and written most accurately about our ideas and how they enter into the understanding, that something more is perceived by sight than merely light and colours with their variations. locke calls sight the most comprehensive of all our senses, conveying to our minds the ideas of light and colours, which pertain only to that sense, and also the far different ideas of space, shape, and motion (essay ii.ix.9). well, i have shown that space or distance is no more the object of sight than it is of hearing (see 46). as for shape and extension, i leave it to anyone who will calmly attend to his own clear and distinct ideas to decide whether his eyesight immediately and strictly presents him with anything but light and colours. or whether he can form in his mind a distinct abstract idea of visible extension or visible shape, exclusive of all colour; and on the other hand whether he can conceive colour without visible extension. for my own part, i must admit that i can't achieve such a fine-grained abstraction; in a strict sense i see nothing but light and colours with their various shades and variations. someone who by eyesight perceives not only light and colours but also ideas far different and distinct from them has a more perfect and comprehensive eyesight than i can lay claim to ! by the mediation of light and colours other very different ideas are suggested to my mind; but so they are by hearing, which beside sounds (which pertain only to that sense) also by the mediation of sounds suggests not only space, shape, and motion but also all other ideas whatsoever that can be signified by words.

thirdly, it is, i think, an axiom universally received that quantities of the same kind may be added together and make one entire sum. mathematicians add lines together: but they do not add a line to a solid, or conceive it as making one sum with a surface: these three kinds of quantity being thought incapable of any such mutual addition, and consequently of being compared together in the several ways of proportion, are by then esteemed entirely disparate and heterogeneous. now let anyone try in his thoughts to add a visible line or surface to a tangible line or surface, so as to conceive them making one continued sum or whole. he that can do this may think them homogeneous: but he that cannot, must by the foregoing axiom think them heterogeneous. a blue and a red line i can conceive added together into one sum and making one continued line: but to make in my thoughts one continued line of a visible and tangible line added together is, i find, a task far more difficult, and even insurmountable: and i leave it to the reflexion and experience of every particular person to determine for himself.
i think it is a universally accepted axiom that quantities of the same kind can be added together to make one entire sum. mathematicians add lines together; but they don't add a line to a solid, or conceive a line as making one sum with a surface. they regard these three kinds of quantity as entirely disparate and heterogeneous, and therefore as incapable of any such addition and therefore incapable of being compared together in the various ways of proportion. now, try in your thoughts to add a visible line or surface to a tangible line or surface, so as to conceive them making one continued sum or whole. if you can do this, you may think them to be homogeneous; but if you can't then by the foregoing axiom you must think them to be heterogeneous. a blue line and a red one i can conceive added together into one sum, making one continued line; but to make in my thoughts one continued line out of a visible line and tangible one added together is, i find, a much harder task, indeed an impossible one; and i leave it to the reflection and experience of each individual person to determine this for himself.

a farther confirmation of our tenet may be drawn from the solution of mr. molyneux's problem, published by mr. locke in his essay: which i shall set down as it there lies, together with mr. locke's opinion of it, suppose a man born blind, and now adult, and taught by his touch to distinguish between a cube and a sphere of the same metal, and nighly of the same bigness, so as to tell, when he felt one and t'other, which is the cube and which the sphere. suppose then the cube and sphere placed on a table, and the blind man to be made to see: quaere, whether by his sight, before he touched them, he could now distinguish and tell which is the globe, which the cube? to which the acute and judicious proposer answers: not. for though he has obtained the experience of how a globe, how a cube, affects his touch, yet he has not yet attained the experience that what affects his touch so or so must affect his sight so or so: or that a protuberant angle in the cube that pressed his hand unequally shall appear to his eye as it doth in the cube. i agree with this thinking gentleman, whom i am proud to call my friend, in his answer to this his problem; and am of opinion that the blind man at first sight would not be able with certainty to say which was the globe, which the cube, whilst he only saw them.
a further confirmation of our tenet may be drawn from the solution of molyneux's problem, published by locke in his essay. here it is, along with locke's opinion of it: suppose a man born blind, and now adult, and taught by his touch to distinguish between a cube and a sphere of the same metal and roughly of the same size, so as to tell when he felt each of them which is the cube and which the sphere. suppose then the cube and sphere placed on a table, and the blind man made to see: question: could he, by his sight before he touched them, tell which is the globe and which the cube? to which the acute and judicious proposer answers: not. for though he has obtained the experience of how a globe and how a cube affects his touch, he hasn't yet had the experience that what affects his touch so-or-so must affect his sight so-or-so; or that a protuberant angle in the cube that pressed his hand unequally will appear to his eye as it does in the cube. i agree with this thinking gentleman in his answer to this problem.

now, if a square surface perceived by touch be of the same sort with a square surface perceived by sight, it is certain the blind man here mentioned might know a square surface as soon as he saw it: it is no more but introducing into his mind by a new inlet an idea he has been already well acquainted with. since, therefore, he is supposed to have known by his touch that a cube is a body terminated by square surfaces, and that a sphere is not terminated by square surfaces: upon the supposition that a visible and tangible square differ only in numero it follows that he might know, by the unerring mark of the square surfaces, which was the cube, and which not, while he only saw them. we must therefore allow either that visible extension and figures are specifically distinct from tangible extension and figures, or else that the solution of this problem given by those two thoughtful and ingenious men is wrong.
now, if a square surface perceived by touch was of the same sort as a square surface perceived by sight, our blind man certainly could know a square surface as soon as he saw it; it would only involve introducing into his mind by a new inlet an idea that he is already well acquainted with. since he is supposed to have known by his touch that a cube is and a sphere is not a body terminated by square surfaces, on the supposition that a visible and tangible square differ only in numero, it follows that he could know by the unerring mark of the square surfaces which was the cube and which wasn't. so we must accept that either visible extension and shapes are specifically distinct from tangible extension and shapes or the solution of this problem given by those two thoughtful and ingenious men is wrong.

much more might be laid together in proof of the proposition i have advanced: but what has been said is, if i mistake not, sufficient to convince anyone that shall yield a reasonable attention: and as for those that will not be at the pains of a little thought, no multiplication of words will ever suffice to make them understand the truth, or rightly conceive my meaning.
much more might be said in proof of the proposition i have advanced; but i think that what i have said is sufficient to convince anyone who attends to it reasonably. as for those who won't take the trouble to think a little, no piling on of words will ever suffice to make them understand the truth or rightly understand what i am saying.

i cannot let go the above-mentioned problem without some reflexion on it. it hath been evident that a man blind from his birth would not, at first sight, denominate anything he saw by the names he had been used to appropriate to ideas of touch, vid. sect. 106. cube, sphere, table are words he has known applied to things perceivable by touch, but to things perfectly intangible he never knew them applied. those words in their wonted application always marked out to his mind bodies or solid things which were perceived by the resistance they gave: but there is no solidity, no resistance or protrusion, perceived by sight. in short, the ideas of sight are all new perceptions, to which there be no names annexed in his mind: he cannot therefore understand what is said to him concerning them: and to ask of the two bodies he saw placed on the table, which was the sphere, which the cube? were to him a question downright bantering and unintelligible; nothing he sees being able to suggest to his thoughts the idea of body, distance, or in general of anything he had already known.
i cannot let the molyneux problem go without some reflection on it. it has been made evident (see 106) that a man blind from his birth would not at first sight give to anything he saw the names he had been used to associating with ideas of touch. cube, sphere, table, are words he has known applied to things perceivable by touch, but he never knew them applied to perfectly intangible things. those words in their usual application always marked out to his mind bodies, i.e. solid things that were perceived by the resistance they gave. but no solidity or resistance or protrusion is perceived by sight. the ideas of sight are all new perceptions that can't be associated with any names in his mind; so he can't understand what is said to him about them in the molyneux situation: if he is asked regarding the two bodies that he saw placed on the table which is the sphere, which the cube? he will regard that question as unintelligible, because nothing he sees can suggest to his thoughts the idea of body, distance, or in general of anything he had already known.

it is a mistake to think the same thing affects both sight and touch. if the same angle or square which is the object of touch be also the object of vision, what should hinder the blind man at first sight from knowing it? for though the manner wherein it affects the sight be different from that wherein it affected his touch, yet, there being beside his manner or circumstance, which is new and unknown, the angle or figure, which is old and known, he cannot choose but discern it.
it is a mistake to think the same thing affects both sight and touch. if the angle or square that is the object of touch were also the object of vision, what would hinder the blind-from-birth man from knowing it at first sight? the manner in which it affected his sight would be different from the manner in which it affected his touch; but alongside this new and unknown manner or circumstance there would be the old and known angle or shape, and he couldn't fail to discern it.

visible figure and extension having been demonstrated to be of a nature entirely different and heterogeneous from tangible figure and extension, it remains that we inquire concerning. now that visible motion is not of the same sort with tangible motion seems to need no farther proof, it being an evident corollary from what we have shown concerning the difference there is between visible and tangible extension: but for a more full and express proof hereof we need only observe that one who had not yet experienced vision would not at first sight know motion. whence it clearly follows that motion perceivable by sight is of a sort distinct from motion perceivable by touch. the antecedent i prove thus: by touch he could not perceive any motion but what was up or down, to the right or left, nearer or farther from him; besides these and their several varieties or complications, it is impossible he should have any idea of motion. he would not therefore think anything to be motion, or give the name motion to any idea which he could not range under some or other of those particular kinds thereof. but from sect. 95 it is plain that by the mere act of vision he could not know motion upwards or downwards, to the right or left, or in any other possible direction. from which i conclude he would not know motion at all at first sight. as for the idea of motion in abstract, i shall not waste paper about it, but leave it to my reader to make the best he can of it. to me it is perfectly unintelligible.
visible shape and extension having been demonstrated to be of an entirely different nature from tangible shape and extension, we still have to ask about motion. that visible motion is not of the same sort as tangible motion seems to need no further proof, because it obviously follows from what i have shown concerning the difference between visible and tangible extension. but here is a more complete and explicit proof of it: our blind-from-birth man could not by touch perceive any motion except what was up or down, to the right or left, towards or away from him; he can't possibly have any idea of motion except these and their several varieties or complications. so he wouldn't think to be motion, or label as motion, any idea that he couldn't classify in terms of those particular kinds of motion. but 95 makes it obvious that the mere act of vision couldn't present him with motion up or down, to the right or left, or in any other possible direction. from which i conclude that he wouldn't know motion at all at first sight; from which it clearly follows that motion perceivable by sight is of a distinct sort from motion perceivable by touch. as for the idea of motion in abstract, i shan't waste paper on that, but leave it to you to make the best you can of it. to me it is perfectly unintelligible.

the consideration of motion may furnish a new field for inquiry: but since the manner wherein the mind apprehends by sight the motion of tangible objects, with the various degrees thereof, may be easily collected from what hath been said concerning the manner wherein that sense doth suggest their various distances, magnitudes, and situations, i shall not enlarge any farther on this subject, but proceed to consider what may be alleged, with greatest appearance of reason, against the proposition we have shown to be true. for where there is so much prejudice to be encountered, a bare and naked demonstration of the truth will scarce suffice. we must also satisfy the scruples that men may raise in favour of their preconceived notions, show whence the mistake arises, how it came to spread, and carefully disclose and root out those false persuasions that an early prejudice might have implanted in the mind.
there may be more to be said about motion; but i shan't go on about it because what i have already said about how the visual sense suggests objects various distances, sizes, and orientations makes it easy to see how the mind apprehends by sight their motions. i shall instead proceed to inquire what are the most plausible objections to the proposition i have shown to be true; for where there's so much prejudice to be encountered, a mere undecorated demonstration of the truth will hardly suffice. we must also satisfy the objections that men may raise in favour of their preconceived notions, show how their mistake arises and how it came to spread, and carefully reveal and root out the false convictions that an early prejudice might have implanted in the mind.

first, therefore, it will be demanded how visible extension and figures come to be called by the same name with tangible extension and figures, if they are not of the same kind with them? it must be something more than humour or accident that could occasion a custom so constant and universal as this, which has obtained in all ages and nations of the world, and amongst all ranks of men, the learned as well as the illiterate.
first, it will be demanded: how do visible extension and shapes come to be called by the same names as tangible extension and shapes, if they aren't of the same kind? it must be something more than a whim or accident that caused a custom as constant and universal as this one, which has obtained in all ages and nations of the world, and amongst all ranks of men, the learned as well as the illiterate.

to which i answer, we can no more argue a visible and tangible square to be of the same species from their being called by the same name, than we can that a tangible square and the monosyllable consisting of six letters whereby it is marked are of the same species because they are both called by the same name. it is customary to call written words and the things they signify by the same name: for words not being regarded in their own nature, or otherwise than as they are marks of things, it had been superfluous, and beside the design of language, to have given them names distinct from those of the things marked by them. the same reason holds here also. visible figures are the marks of tangible figures, and from sect. 59 it is plain that in themselves they are little regarded, or upon any other score than for their connexion with tangible figures, which by nature they are ordained to signify. and because this language of nature doth not vary in different ages or nations, hence it is that in all times and places visible figures are called by the same names as the respective tangible figures suggested by them, and not because they are alike or of the same sort with them.
to which i answer that we can no more argue that a visible and a tangible square are of the same species because they are called by the same name than we can argue that a tangible square and the six-letter monosyllable by which it is marked are of the same species because they are both called by the same name. it is customary to call written words and the things they signify by the same name. because words aren't regarded in their own nature or in any way except as marks of things, it would have been superfluous and irrelevant to the purpose of language to give them names distinct from those of the things marked by them. doesn't vary in different ages or nations, it comes about that in all times and places visible shapes are called by the same names as the respective tangible shapes suggested by them. it's not because they are alike, or of the same sort as them.

but, say you, surely a tangible square is liker to a visible square than to a visible circle: it has four angles and as many sides: so also has the visible square: but the visible circle has no such thing, being bounded by one uniform curve without right lines or angles, which makes it unfit to represent the tangible square but very fit to represent the tangible circle. whence it clearly follows that visible figures are patterns of, or of the same species with, the respective tangible figures represented by them: that they are like unto them, and of their own nature fitted to represent them, as being of the same sort: and that they are in no respect arbitrary signs, as words.
you will say: but surely a tangible square is more like a visible square than a visible circle. it has four angles and four sides, and so has the visible square; whereas the visible circle has no such thing, being bounded by one uniform curve with no straight lines or angles, which makes it unfit to represent the tangible square but very fit to represent the tangible circle. from this it clearly follows that visible shapes are patterns of the respective tangible shapes represented by them; they are of the same species as them, are like them, fitted by their own nature to represent them because they are of same sort. they are in no respect arbitrary signs as words are.

i answer, it must be acknowledged the visible square is fitter than the visible circle to represent the tangible square, but then it is not because it is liker, or more of a species with it, but because the visible square contains in it several distinct parts, whereby to mark the several distinct corresponding parts of a tangible square, whereas the visible circle doth not. the square perceived by touch hath four distinct, equal sides, so also hath it four distinct equal angles. it is therefore necessary that the visible figure which shall be most proper to mark it contain four distinct equal parts corresponding to the four sides of the tangible square, as likewise four other distinct and equal parts whereby to denote the four equal angles of the tangible square. and accordingly we see the visible figures contain in them distinct visible parts, answering to the distinct tangible parts of the figures signified or suggested by them.
i have to agree that the visible square is more fit than the visible circle to represent the tangible square, but not because it is more like it, more of a species with it. rather, it is because the visible square does, whereas the visible circle doesn't, contain several distinct parts by which to mark the several distinct corresponding parts of a tangible square. the square perceived by touch has four distinct equal sides, and four distinct equal angles; so the visible shape that marks it best must have four distinct equal parts corresponding to the four sides of the tangible square, and four other distinct and equal parts by which to denote its four angles. and accordingly we see the visible shapes contain in them distinct visible parts, answering to the distinct tangible parts of the shapes signified or suggested by them.

but it will not hence follow that any visible figure is like unto, or of the same species with, its corresponding tangible figure, unless it be also shown that not only the number but also the kind of the parts be the same in both. to illustrate this, i observe that visible figures represent tangible figures much after the same manner that written words do sounds. now, in this respect words are not arbitrary, it not being indifferent what written word stands for any sound: but it is requisite that each word contain in it so many distinct characters as there are variations in the sound it stands for. thus the single letter a is proper to mark one simple uniform sound; and the word adultery is accommodated to represent the sound annexed to it, in the formation whereof there being eight different collisions or modifications of the air by the organs of speech, each of which produces a difference of sound, it was fit the word representing it should consist of as many distinct characters, thereby to mark each particular difference or part of the whole sound. and yet nobody, i presume, will say the single letter a, or the word adultery, are like unto, or of the same species with, the respective sounds by them represented. it is indeed arbitrary that, in general, letters of any language represent sounds at all: but when that is once agreed, it is not arbitrary what combination of letters shall represent this or that particular sound. i leave this with the reader to pursue, and apply it in his own thoughts.
but it won't follow that any visible shape is like or of the same species as its corresponding tangible shape, unless it is also shown that not only the number but also the kind of the parts is the same in both. here is an illustration. visible shapes represent tangible shapes in much the same way that written words represent sounds. in this respect words are not arbitrary; it isn't indifferent what written word stands for any sound. each written word has to contain as many distinct characters as there are variations in the sound it stands for. thus the single letter a is proper to mark one simple uniform sound; and the word adultery is suitable for representing the sound annexed to it. in the making of that sound there are eight different changes of the air by the organs of speech, each of which produces a difference of sound; so it was fit that the word representing it should consist of eight distinct characters to mark each of the eight parts of the whole sound. but i don't think anyone will say that the single letter a or the word adultery are like of the same species as the respective sounds they represent. it is indeed arbitrary that the letters of any language represent sounds at all; but once it is agreed that they will, it isn't arbitrary what combination of letters shall represent this or that particular sound. i leave this for you to pursue, and apply it in your own thoughts.

it must be confessed that we are not so apt to confound other signs with the things signified, or to think them of the same species, as we are visible and tangible ideas. but a little consideration will show us how this may be without our supposing them of a like nature. these signs are constant and universal, their connexion with tangible ideas has been learnt at our first entrance into the world; and ever since, almost every moment of our lives, it has been occurring to our thoughts, and fastening and striking deeper on our minds. when we observe that signs are variable, and of human institution; when we remember there was a time they were not connected in our minds with those things they now so readily suggest; but that their signification was learned by the slow steps of experience: this preserves us from confounding them. but when we find the same signs suggest the same things all over the world; when we know they are not of human institution, and cannot remember that we ever learned their signification, but think that at first sight they would have suggested to us the same things they do now: all this persuades us they are of the same species as the things respectively represented by them, and that it is by a natural resemblance they suggest them to our minds.
admittedly, we aren't as apt to confound other signs with the things signified, or to think them of the same species, as we are visible and tangible ideas. but a little consideration will show us why this is so without our supposing them to be alike. these visible signs are constant and universal, their connection with tangible ideas is learnt when we first come into the world; and almost every moment after that it occurs to our thoughts and fastens and strikes deeper on our minds. when we observe that linguistic signs are variable, and instituted by humans; when we remember that there was a time when they weren't connected in our minds with the things they now so readily suggest, and that their signification was learned by the slow steps of experience; this preserves us from confusing them with the things they signify. but when we find that the same visual signs suggest the same things all over the world; when we know they aren't instituted by humans, and we can't remember that we ever learned their signification, and think though wrongly that at first sight they would have suggested to us the same things they do now; all this persuades us that they are of the same species as the things they respectively represent, and that it's by a natural resemblance that they suggest them to our minds.

add to this that whenever we make a nice survey of any object, successively directing the optic axis to each point thereof, there are certain lines and figures described by the motion of the head or eye, which being in truth perceived by feeling, do nevertheless so mix themselves, as it were, with the ideas of sight, that we can scarce think but they appertain to that sense. again, the ideas of sight enter into the mind several at once, more distinct and unmingled than is usual in the other senses beside the touch. sounds, for example, perceived at the same instant, are apt to coalesce, if i may so say, into one sound: but we can perceive at the same time great variety of visible objects, very separate and distinct from each other. now tangible extension being made up of several distinct coexistent parts, we may hence gather another reason that may dispose us to imagine a likeness or an analogy between the immediate objects of sight and touch. but nothing, certainly, doth more contribute to blend and confound them together than the strict and close connexion they have with each other. we cannot open our eyes but the ideas of distance, bodies, and tangible figures are suggested by them. so swift and sudden and unperceived is the transition from visible to tangible ideas that we can scarce forbear thinking them equally the immediate object of vision.
and another point: whenever we look carefully and in detail at an object, successively directing the optic axis to each point on it, the motion of the head or eye traces out certain lines and shapes that are really perceived by feeling but so mix themselves with the ideas of sight (so to speak) that we can hardly avoid thinking of them as visual. also: the ideas of sight enter into the mind, several at once, more distinct and unmingled than is usual in the other senses (apart from the sense of touch). when different sounds, for example, are perceived at the same instant they are apt to coalesce (so to speak) into one sound: but we can perceive at the same time a great variety of visible objects, very separate and distinct from each other. now tangible extension is made up of many distinct coexistent parts, and this may be another reason for our tendency to imagine a likeness or analogy between the immediate objects of sight and of touch. but nothing contributes more to blending and confounding them together than their strict and close connection with each other. the moment we open our eyes the ideas of distance, bodies, and tangible shapes are suggested by them. the transition from visible to tangible ideas is so swift and sudden, and so unperceived, that we can hardly help thinking of them as equally the immediate object of vision.

the prejudice which is grounded on these, and whatever other causes may be assigned thereof, sticks so fast that it is impossible without obstinate striving and labour of the mind to get entirely clear of it. but then the reluctancy we find in rejecting any opinion can be no argument of its truth to whoever considers what has been already shown with regard to the prejudices we entertain concerning the distance, magnitude, and situation of objects; prejudices so familiar to our minds, so confirmed and inveterate, as they will hardly give way to the clearest demonstration.
the prejudice that comes from these causes and perhaps others sticks so fast in our minds that it's impossible without obstinate striving and mental labour to get entirely clear of it. but our reluctance to rejecting an opinion can't be an argument for its truth in the mind of anyone who considers what i have already shown regarding the prejudices we entertain concerning the distance, size, and orientation of objects; prejudices so familiar to our minds, so confirmed and inveterate, that they will hardly give way to the clearest demonstration.

upon the whole, i think we may fairly conclude that the proper objects of vision constitute an universal language of the author of nature, whereby we are instructed how to regulate our actions in order to attain those things that are necessary to the preservation and well-being of our bodies, as also to avoid whatever may be hurtful and destructive of them. it is by their information that we are principally guided in all the transactions and concerns of life. and the manner wherein they signify and mark unto us the objects which are at a distance is the same with that of languages and signs of human appointment, which do not suggest the things signified by any likeness or identity of nature, but only by an habitual connexion that experience has made us to observe between them.
i think we can fairly conclude that the proper objects of vision constitute a universal language of the author of nature by which we are told how to regulate our actions so as to get the things we need for the preservation and well-being of our bodies and avoid whatever may be hurtful and destructive of them. their information is our principal guide in all the transactions and concerns of life. as for how they signify and mark to us objects that are at a distance, it's the same as how humanly devised languages signify things not by any likeness or identity of nature, but only by an habitual connection that experience has shown us between them.

suppose one who had always continued blind be told by his guide that after he has advanced so many steps he shall come to the brink of a precipice, or be stopped by a wall; must not this to him seem very admirable and surprizing? he cannot conceive how it is possible for mortals to frame such predictions as these, which to him would seem as strange and unaccountable as prophesy doth to others. even they who are blessed with the visive faculty may (though familiarity make it less observed) find therein sufficient cause of admiration. the wonderful art and contrivance wherewith it is adjusted to those ends and purposes for which it was apparently designed, the vast extent, number, and variety of objects that are at once with so much ease and quickness and pleasure suggested by it: all these afford subject for much and pleasing speculation, and may, if anything, give us some glimmering analogous prenotion of things which are placed beyond the certain discovery and comprehension of our present state.
suppose that someone who is blind and always has been is told by his guide that after he has taken ten steps forwards he will come to the brink of a precipice (or that he'll be stopped by a wall); mustn't this to him seem very wonderful and surprising? he can't conceive how it is possible for mortals to frame predictions such as these, which to him would seem as strange and unaccountable as prophecy does to others. even those who are blessed with eyesight might find it to be a sufficient cause of wonder (though familiarity makes it less observed). the wonderful art and contrivance with which it is fitted to the goals and purposes for which it was apparently designed; and the vast extent, number, and variety of objects that are at once suggested by it with so much ease, speed and pleasure; these provide materials for much speculation pleasing speculation and may give us some glimmering, analogous prenotion of things that we can't properly discover and comprehend in our present state.

i do not design to trouble myself with drawing corollaries from the doctrine i have hitherto laid down. if it bears the test others may, so far as they shall think convenient, employ their thoughts in extending it farther, and applying it to whatever purposes it may be subservient to: only, i cannot forbear making some inquiry concerning the object of geometry, which the subject we have been upon doth naturally lead one to. we have shown there is no such idea as that of extension in abstract, and that there are two kinds of sensible extension and figures which are entirely distinct and heterogeneous from each other. now, it is natural to inquire which of these is the object of geometry.
i don't plan to put work into drawing corollaries from the doctrine i have laid down. if it survives the test, then others may (as far as they see fit) employ their thoughts in extending it further and applying it to whatever purposes it may serve. but i can't forbear to make some inquiry about the object of geometry, a question that naturally arises out of the topics i have been treating. i have shown there is no such idea as that of extension in abstract, and that there are two kinds of sensible extension and shapes, which are entirely distinct and dissimilar from one another. it is natural to ask: which of these is the object of geometry?

some things there are which at first sight incline one to think geometry conversant about visible extension. the constant use of the eyes, both in the practical and speculative parts of that science, doth very much induce us thereto. it would, without doubt, seem odd to a mathematician to go about to convince him the diagrams he saw upon paper were not the figures, or even the likeness of the figures, which make the subject of the demonstration. the contrary being held an unquestionable truth, not only by mathematicians, but also by those who apply themselves more particularly to the study of logic; i mean, who consider the nature of science, certainty, and demonstration: it being by them assigned as one reason of the extraordinary clearness and evidence of geometry that in this science the reasonings are free from those inconveniences which attend the use of arbitrary signs, the very ideas themselves being copied out and exposed to view upon paper. but, by the bye, how well this agrees with what they likewise assert of abstract ideas being the object of geometrical demonstration i leave to be considered.
some things incline one at first sight to think that geometry's topic is visible extension. we are strongly led in that direction by the constant use of our eyes in both the practical and the speculative parts of that science. a mathematician would certainly find it odd if we tried to convince him that the diagrams he sees on paper are not the figures or even likenesses of the figures that his demonstrations are about. the contrary view is regarded as an unquestionable truth not only by mathematicians but also by those who apply themselves more particularly to the study of logic i mean those who consider the nature of science, certainty, and demonstration. those people give as one reason for the extraordinary clearness and evidentness of geometry that in this science the reasonings are free from the drawbacks of the use of arbitrary signs, because the very ideas themselves are copied out and exposed to view on paper! (incidentally, how well does this square with what they say about abstract ideas being the object of geometrical demonstration? i leave that for you to think about.)

to come to a resolution in this point we need only observe what hath been said in sect. 59, 60, 61, where it is shown that visible extensions in themselves are little regarded, and have no settled determinable greatness, and that men measure altogether, by the application of tangible extension to tangible extension. all which makes it evident that visible extension and figures are not the object of geometry.
to reach a decision about this, we need only observe what i said in 59.-61, where i showed that visible extensions in themselves are little regarded and have no settled determinate size, and that measurements are always made by applying tangible extension to tangible extension. all of which makes it evident that visible extension and figures are not the object of geometry.

it is therefore plain that visible figure are of the same use in geometry that words are: and the one may as well be accounted the object of that science as the other, neither of them being otherwise concerned therein than as they represent or suggest to the mind the particular tangible figures connected with them. there is indeed this difference between the signification of tangible figures by visible figures, and of ideas by words: that whereas the latter is variable and uncertain, depending altogether on the arbitrary appointment of men, the former is fixed and immutably the same in all times and places. a visible square, for instance, suggests to the mind the same tangible figure in europe that it doth in america. hence it is that the voice of the author of nature which speaks to our eyes, is not liable to that misinterpretation and ambiguity that languages of human contrivance are unavoidably subject to.
so it's clear that visible figures have the same use in geometry as words have, and that they have no more claim to be the subject-matter of that science than words have, because the only relevance to it that either of them has is as representing or suggesting to the mind the particular tangible figures connected with them. there is indeed this difference between the two: how words signify ideas is variable and uncertain, depending entirely on the arbitrary decisions of men, whereas how visible figures signify tangible figures is fixed and immutably the same in all times and places a visible square suggests to the mind in europe the same tangible figure that it suggests in america. that is why the voice of the author of nature that speaks to our eyes is not open to the misinterpretation and ambiguity that languages of human design are unavoidably subject to.

though what has been said may suffice to show what ought to be determined with relation to the object of geometry, i shall nevertheless, for the fuller illustration thereof, consider the case of an intelligence, or unbodied spirit, which is supposed to see perfectly well, i.e. to have a clear perception of the proper and immediate objects of sight, but to have no sense of touch. whether there be any such being in nature or no is beside my purpose to inquire. it sufficeth that the supposition contains no contradiction in it. let us now examine what proficiency such a one may be able to make in geometry. which speculation will lead us more clearly to see whether the ideas of sight can possibly be the object of that science.
what i have said may suffice to show what we ought to think about the object of geometry; but i shall illustrate it more fully by considering a possible being who is an intelligence i.e. an unbodied spirit which sees perfectly well, i.e. has a clear perception of the proper and immediate objects of sight, but has no sense of touch. (i shall call him ui, short for unembodied intelligence.) it doesn't matter for my purposes whether there is any such being in nature; all i need is that the supposition of him contains no contradiction. let us now examine what proficiency ui can have in geometry. this will lead us to see more clearly whether the ideas of sight can possibly be the object of that science.

first, then, it is certain the aforesaid intelligence could have no idea of a solid, or quantity of three dimensions, which followeth from its not having any idea of distance. we indeed are prone to think that we have by sight the ideas of space and solids, which ariseth from our imagining that we do, strictly speaking, see distance and some parts of an object at a greater distance than others; which hath been demonstrated to be the effect of the experience we have had, what ideas of touch are connected with such and such ideas attending vision: but the intelligence here spoken of is supposed to have no experience of touch. he would not, therefore, judge as we do, nor have any idea of distance, outness, or profundity, nor consequently of space or body, either immediately or by suggestion. whence it is plain he can have no notion of those parts of geometry which relate to the mensuration of solids and their convex or concave surfaces, and contemplate the properties of lines generated by the section of a solid. the conceiving of any part whereof is beyond the reach of his faculties.
first, then, it is certain that ui can have no idea of a solid, i.e. of a quantity of three dimensions, because he has no idea of distance. we're apt to think that we have by sight the ideas of space and solids, being led into this error by imagining that we do strictly speaking see distance and see some parts of an object at a greater distance than others; which i have demonstrated to be the effect of the experience we have had of what ideas of touch are connected with such-and-such ideas of vision. but ui has no experience of touch, so he doesn't judge as we do. he does not have immediately or by suggestion any idea of distance, outness, or depth, so he has no idea of space or body. clearly, then, he can't have any notion of the parts of geometry that relate to the measurement of solids and their convex or concave surfaces, and have to do with the properties of lines generated by the section of a solid. the conceiving of any part of this is beyond the reach of his faculties.

farther, he cannot comprehend the manner wherein geometers describe a right line or circle; the rule and compass with their use being things of which it is impossible he should have any notion: nor is it an easier matter for him to conceive the placing of one plane or angle on another, in order to prove their equality: since that supposeth some idea of distance or external space. all which makes it evident our pure intelligence could never attain to know so much as the first elements of plane geometry. and perhaps upon a nice inquiry it will be found he cannot even have an idea of plane figures any more than he can of solids; since some idea of distance is necessary to form the idea of a geometrical plane, as will appear to whoever shall reflect a little on it.
further, he can't understand geometers way of describing a straight line or circle, because he can't possibly have any notion of the ruler and compass and their uses. nor is it any easier for him to conceive the placing of one plane or angle on another in order to prove their equality, because that requires some idea of distance or external space. all of which makes it obvious that ui could never know even the first elements of plane geometry. and a careful inquiry will show that he can't even have an idea of plane figures, any more than he can of solids; because forming the idea of a geometrical plane requires some idea of distance, as you'll see if you think about it a little.

all that is properly perceived by the visive faculty amounts to no more than colours, with their variations and different proportions of light and shade. but the perpetual mutability and fleetingness of those immediate objects of sight render them incapable of being managed after the manner of geometrical figures; nor is it in any degree useful that they should. it is true there are divers of them perceived at once, and more of some and less of others: but accurately to compute their magnitude and assign precise determinate proportions between things so variable and inconstant, if we suppose it possible to be done, must yet be a very trifling and insignificant labour.
all that is properly perceived by eyesight amounts to colours with their variations, and different proportions of light and shade; and the way those immediate objects of sight perpetually alter and flit away makes it impossible to manage them in the way geometrical figures are managed; nor would it be of the slightest use to do so. it's true that a variety of them are perceived at the same time, more of some kinds and less of others; but even if it were possible to compute their size accurately and assign precise determinate proportions to things so variable and inconstant, it would be a very trivial and pointless labour.

i must confess men are tempted to think that flat or plane figures are immediate objects of sight, though they acknowledge solids are not. and this opinion is grounded on what is observed in painting, wherein (it seems) the ideas immediately imprinted on the mind are only of planes variously coloured, which by a sudden act of the judgment are changed into solids. but with a little attention we shall find the planes here mentioned as the immediate objects of sight are not visible but tangible planes. for when we say that pictures are planes, we mean thereby that they appear to the touch smooth and uniform. but then this smoothness and uniformity, or, in other words, this planeness of the picture, is not perceived immediately by vision: for it appeareth to the eye various and multiform.
i must admit that some able men seem to hold that flat or plane figures are immediate objects of sight, though they acknowledge that solids are not. this opinion of theirs is based on what is observed in painting, where (they say) the ideas immediately imprinted on the mind are only of variously coloured planes, which by a sudden act of the judgment are changed into solids. but with a little attention we shall find that the planes here described as the immediate objects of sight are not visible planes but tangible ones. when we say that pictures are planes we mean that they appear smooth and uniform to the touch. but then this smoothness and uniformity i.e. this planeness of the picture is not perceived immediately by vision, for the picture appears to the eye various and multiform.

from all which we may conclude that planes are no more the immediate object of sight than solids. what we strictly see are not solids, nor yet planes variously coloured: they are only diversity of colours. and some of these suggest to the mind solids, and other plane figures, just as they have been experienced to be connected with the one or the other: so that we see planes in the same way that we see solids, both being equally suggested by the immediate objects of sight, which accordingly are themselves denominated planes and solids. but though they are called by the same names with the things marked by them, they are nevertheless of a nature entirely different, as hath been demonstrated.
from all of which we can conclude that planes are no more the immediate object of sight than solids are. what we strictly see are neither solids nor variously coloured planes but only diversity of colours. some of these suggest solids to the mind and others suggest plane figures, according to what they have been experienced to be connected with. so that we see planes in the same way that we see solids, both being equally suggested by the immediate objects of sight, which accordingly are themselves called planes and solids. but though they are called by the same names as the things marked by them, they are of an entirely different nature, as i have demonstrated.

what hath been said is, if i mistake not, sufficient to decide the question we proposed to examine, concerning the ability of a pure spirit, such as we have described, to know geometry. it is, indeed, no easy matter for us to enter precisely into the thoughts of such an intelligence, because we cannot without great pains cleverly separate and disentangle in our thoughts the proper objects of sight from those of touch which are connected with them. this, indeed, in a complete degree seems scarce possible to be performed: which will not seem strange to us if we consider how hard it is for anyone to hear the words of his native language pronounced in his ears without understanding them. though he endeavour to disunite the meaning from the sound, it will nevertheless intrude into his thoughts, and he shall find it extreme difficult, if not impossible, to put himself exactly in the posture of a foreigner that never learned the language, so as to be affected barely with the sounds themselves, and not perceive the signification annexed to them. by this time, i suppose, it is clear that neither abstract nor visible extension makes the object of geometry; the not discerning of which may perhaps have created some difficulty and useless labour in mathematics. sure i am, that somewhat relating thereto has occurred to my thoughts, which, though after the most anxious and repeated examination i am forced to think it true, doth, nevertheless, seem so far out of the common road of geometry, that i know not whether it may not be thought presumption, if i should make it public in an age, wherein that science hath received such mighty improvements by new methods; great part whereof, as well as of the ancient discoveries, may perhaps lose their reputation, and much of that ardour with which men study the abstruse and fine geometry be abated, if what to me, and those few to whom i have imparted it, seems evidently true, should really prove to be so.
what i have said seems to me enough to decide the question i set out to examine, concerning the ability of a pure spirit such as ui to know geometry. it is indeed hard for us to enter precisely into the thoughts of such an intelligence, because it's very hard for us to completely separate and disentangle in our thoughts the proper objects of sight from objects of touch that are connected with them. indeed, it seems hardly possible to do this completely. and that won't seem strange to us if we consider how hard it is for anyone to hear the words of his native language pronounced in his ears without understanding them. he may try to separate the meaning from the sound, but it will intrude into his thoughts and he'll find it extremely difficult, if not impossible, to put himself exactly in the position of a foreigner who has never learned the language, so as to be affected barely with the sounds themselves and not perceive their meaning. by this time, i suppose, it is clear that the object of geometry is neither abstract extension nor visible extension. not realising this may have created some difficulty and useless labour in mathematics.

introduction
introduction

philosophy being nothing else but the study of wisdom and truth, it may with reason be expected that those who have spent most time and pains in it should enjoy a greater calm and serenity of mind, a greater clearness and evidence of knowledge, and be less disturbed with doubts and difficulties than other men. yet so it is, we see the illiterate bulk of mankind that walk the high-road of plain common sense, and are governed by the dictates of nature, for the most part easy and undisturbed. to them nothing that is familiar appears unaccountable or difficult to comprehend. they complain not of any want of evidence in their senses, and are out of all danger of becoming sceptics. but no sooner do we depart from sense and instinct to follow the light of a superior principle, to reason, meditate, and reflect on the nature of things, but a thousand scruples spring up in our minds concerning those things which before we seemed fully to comprehend. prejudices and errors of sense do from all parts discover themselves to our view; and, endeavouring to correct these by reason, we are insensibly drawn into uncouth paradoxes, difficulties, and inconsistencies, which multiply and grow upon us as we advance in speculation, till at length, having wandered through many intricate mazes, we find ourselves just where we were, or, which is worse, sit down in a forlorn scepticism.
philosophy is just the study of wisdom and truth, so one might reasonably expect that those who have spent most time and care on it would enjoy a greater calm and serenity of mind, know things more clearly and certainly, and be less disturbed with doubts and difficulties than other men. but what we find is quite different, namely that the illiterate majority of people, who walk the high road of plain common sense and are governed by the dictates of nature, are mostly comfortable and undisturbed. to them nothing that is familiar appears hard to explain or to understand. they don't complain of any lack of certainty in their senses, and are in no danger of becoming sceptics. but as soon as we depart from sense and instinct to follow the light of a higher principle i.e. to reason, meditate, and reflect on the nature of things a thousand doubts spring up in our minds concerning things that we previously seemed to understand fully. we encounter many prejudices and errors of the senses; and when we try to correct these by reason, we are gradually drawn into crude paradoxes, difficulties, and inconsistencies that multiply and grow on us as our thoughts progress; until finally, having wandered through many intricate mazes, we find ourselves back where we started or which is worse we sit down in a forlorn scepticism.

the cause of this is thought to be the obscurity of things, or the natural weakness and imperfection of our understandings. it is said, the faculties we have are few, and those designed by nature for the support and comfort of life, and not to penetrate into the inward essence and constitution of things. besides, the mind of man being finite, when it treats of things which partake of infinity, it is not to be wondered at if it run into absurdities and contradictions, out of which it is impossible it should ever extricate itself, it being of the nature of infinite not to be comprehended by that which is finite.
the cause of this is thought to be the obscurity of things or the natural weakness and imperfection of our understandings. it is said that our faculties are few in number and are designed by nature merely to promote survival and comfort, not to penetrate into the inward essence and constitution of things. besides, they say, it isn't surprising that the finite mind of man runs into absurdities and contradictions ones from which it can't possibly escape when it tackles things that involve infinity, because it is of the nature of the infinite not to be comprehended by anything that is finite.

but, perhaps, we may be too partial to ourselves in placing the fault originally in our faculties, and not rather in the wrong use we make of them. it is a hard thing to suppose that right deductions from true principles should ever end in consequences which cannot be maintained or made consistent. we should believe that god has dealt more bountifully with the sons of men than to give them a strong desire for that knowledge which he had placed quite out of their reach. this were not agreeable to the wonted indulgent methods of providence, which, whatever appetites it may have implanted in the creatures, doth usually furnish them with such means as, if rightly made use of, will not fail to satisfy them. upon the whole, i am inclined to think that the far greater part, if not all, of those difficulties which have hitherto amused philosophers, and blocked up the way to knowledge, are entirely owing to ourselves that we have first raised a dust and then complain we cannot see.
but when we lay the blame for our paradoxes and difficulties on our faculties rather than on our wrong use of them, perhaps we are letting ourselves down too lightly. it is hard to believe that right deductions from true principles should ever lead to conclusions that can't be maintained or made consistent. we should believe that god has been more generous with men than to give them a strong desire for knowledge that he has placed out of their reach. that wouldn't square with the kindly ways in which providence, having given creatures various desires, usually supplies them the means if used properly to satisfy them. i'm inclined to think that most if not all of the difficulties that have in the past puzzled and deceived philosophers and blocked the way to knowledge are entirely of our own making. we have first raised a dust, and then we complain that we can't see.

my purpose therefore is, to try if i can discover what those principles are which have introduced all that doubtfulness and uncertainty, those absurdities and contradictions, into the several sects of philosophy; insomuch that the wisest men have thought our ignorance incurable, conceiving it to arise from the natural dulness and limitation of our faculties. and surely it is a work well deserving our pains to make a strict inquiry concerning the first principles of human knowledge, to sift and examine them on all sides, especially since there may be some grounds to suspect that those lets and difficulties, which stay and embarrass the mind in its search after truth, do not spring from any darkness and intricacy in the objects, or natural defect in the understanding, so much as from false principles which have been insisted on, and might have been avoided.
my purpose therefore is to try to discover what the underlying sources are of all that doubtfulness and uncertainty, those absurdities and contradictions, into which the various sects of philosophy have fallen and indeed fallen so badly that the wisest men have thought our ignorance to be incurable, thinking that it comes from the natural dullness and limitedness of our faculties. surely it is well worth the trouble to make a strict enquiry into the first principles of human knowledge, to sift and examine them on all sides; especially since there may be some grounds to suspect that the obstacles and difficulties that block and confuse the mind in its search for truth don't spring from any darkness and intricacy in the objects, or any natural defect in the understanding, but come rather from false principles that have been insisted on and might have been avoided.

how difficult and discouraging soever this attempt may seem, when i consider how many great and extraordinary men have gone before me in the like designs, yet i am not without some hopes upon the consideration that the largest views are not always the clearest, and that he who is short sighted will be obliged to draw the object nearer, and may, perhaps, by a close and narrow survey, discern that which had escaped far better eyes.
when i consider how many great and extraordinary men have already tried to do this, my own attempt seems difficult and discouraging. but i have some hope of success, because the largest views aren't always the clearest, and he who is shortsighted will have to bring the object nearer to him, and may by looking closely at the fine details notice things that have escaped far better eyes.

proper acceptation of abstraction. it is agreed on all hands that the qualities or modes of things do never really exist each of them apart by itself, and separated from all others, but are mixed, as it were, and blended together, several in the same object. but, we are told, the mind being able to consider each quality singly, or abstracted from those other qualities with which it is united, does by that means frame to itself abstract ideas. for example, there is perceived by sight an object extended, coloured, and moved: this mixed or compound idea the mind resolving into its simple, constituent parts, and viewing each by itself, exclusive of the rest, does frame the abstract ideas of extension, colour, and motion. not that it is possible for colour or motion to exist without extension; but only that the mind can frame to itself by abstraction the idea of colour exclusive of extension, and of motion exclusive of both colour and extension.
everyone agrees that the qualities of things never really exist in isolation from one another; rather, they are mixed and blended together, several in the same object. but, we are told by the supporters of abstract ideas, the mind can consider each quality on its own, abstracted from the others with which it is united in the object, and in that way the mind forms abstract ideas. for example, your eyesight presents you with an object that is extended, coloured, and moving; and your mind resolves this mixed or compound idea into its simple, constituent parts, and views each in isolation from the rest; which is how it forms the abstract ideas of extension, of colour, and of motion. it isn't possible for colour or motion to exist without extension: but according to these abstract idea theorists the mind can by abstraction form the idea of colour without extension, and of motion without either colour or extension.

of generalizing. again, the mind having observed that in the particular extensions perceived by sense there is something common and alike in all, and some other things peculiar, as this or that figure or magnitude, which distinguish them one from another; it considers apart or singles out by itself that which is common, making thereof a most abstract idea of extension, which is neither line, surface, nor solid, nor has any figure or magnitude, but is an idea entirely prescinded from all these. so likewise the mind, by leaving out of the particular colours perceived by sense that which distinguishes them one from another, and retaining that only which is common to all, makes an idea of colour in abstract which is neither red, nor blue, nor white, nor any other determinate colour. and, in like manner, by considering motion abstractedly not only from the body moved, but likewise from the figure it describes, and all particular directions and velocities, the abstract idea of motion is framed; which equally corresponds to all particular motions whatsoever that may be perceived by sense.
again, the mind observes that the extended things that we perceive by sense, although they vary in size, shape and so on, also all have something in common; and it singles out and isolates the common element, thereby forming a highly abstract idea of extension. this is neither line, surface, nor solid, and it has no particular shape or size; it is an idea entirely separated out from all these features that distinguish extended things from one another. similarly the mind can leave out all the differences amongst the colours that are seen, retaining only what is common to them all; and in this way it makes an idea of colour, which is not red, blue, white or any other specific colour. again, by considering motion on its own separated out not only from the body that moves but also from how it moves, in what direction and how fast the mind forms an abstract idea of motion, which is equally applicable to all particular movements that we can perceive through our senses the movement of a beckoning finger and the movement of venus around the sun.

of compounding. and as the mind frames to itself abstract ideas of qualities or modes, so does it, by the same precision or mental separation, attain abstract ideas of the more compounded beings which include several coexistent qualities. for example, the mind having observed that peter, james, and john resemble each other in certain common agreements of shape and other qualities, leaves out of the complex or compounded idea it has of peter, james, and any other particular man, that which is peculiar to each, retaining only what is common to all, and so makes an abstract idea wherein all the particulars equally partake abstracting entirely from and cutting off all those circumstances and differences which might determine it to any particular existence. and after this manner it is said we come by the abstract idea of man, or, if you please, humanity, or human nature; wherein it is true there is included colour, because there is no man but has some colour, but then it can be neither white, nor black, nor any particular colour, because there is no one particular colour wherein all men partake. so likewise there is included stature, but then it is neither tall stature, nor low stature, nor yet middle stature, but something abstracted from all these. and so of the rest. moreover, their being a great variety of other creatures that partake in some parts, but not all, of the complex idea of man, the mind, leaving out those parts which are peculiar to men, and retaining those only which are common to all the living creatures, frames the idea of animal, which abstracts not only from all particular men, but also all birds, beasts, fishes, and insects. the constituent parts of the abstract idea of animal are body, life, sense, and spontaneous motion. by body is meant body without any particular shape or figure, there being no one shape or figure common to all animals, without covering, either of hair, or feathers, or scales, &c., nor yet naked: hair, feathers, scales, and nakedness being the distinguishing properties of particular animals, and for that reason left out of the abstract idea. upon the same account the spontaneous motion must be neither walking, nor flying, nor creeping; it is nevertheless a motion, but what that motion is it is not easy to conceive.
the kind of mental separation through which the mind forms abstract ideas of qualities taken singly also enables it to achieve abstract ideas of more complex items each of which includes a number of qualities that exist together in a single object. for example, having observed that peter, james, and john have certain features of shape etc. in common, the mind forms a complex idea that leaves out whatever differentiates these men from one another or from other men, and retains only what is common to all; and in this way it makes an abstract idea that applies equally to all men, excluding any details that might tie it down to any one man in particular. this they say is how we come to have the abstract idea of man or of humanity or human nature, if you like. this idea includes colour, because every man has some colour; but then it can be neither white, nor black, nor any particular colour, because there is no one colour that all men have. the idea also includes height because every man has some height or other, but it is neither tall nor short nor middling, but something abstracted from all these because there is no one height that all men have. similarly for all the rest. furthermore, many sorts of creatures correspond in some ways but not all to the complex idea of man; and the mind, leaving out the features that are special to men and retaining only the ones that are shared by all the living creatures, forms the idea of animal. this abstracts not only from all particular men, but also all birds, beasts, fishes, and insects. the constituent parts of the abstract idea of animal are body, life, sense, and spontaneous motion. by body is meant body without any particular shape or size, because no one shape or size is common to all animals. the idea doesn't include any specific kind of covering hair or feathers or scales, etc. but nor does it specify bare skin; for various animals differ in respect of whether they have hair, feathers, scales, or bare skin, so that all those differences must be left out of the abstract idea of animal. for the same reason, the spontaneous motion must not be walking, flying or creeping; but it is a motion all the same. what kind of motion it can be isn't easy to conceive.

existence of general ideas admitted. by observing how ideas become general we may the better judge how words are made so. and here it is to be noted that i do not deny absolutely there are general ideas, but only that there are any abstract general ideas; for, in the passages we have quoted wherein there is mention of general ideas, it is always supposed that they are formed by abstraction, after the manner set forth in sections 8 and 9. now, if we will annex a meaning to our words, and speak only of what we can conceive, i believe we shall acknowledge that an idea which, considered in itself, is particular, becomes general by being made to represent or stand for all other particular ideas of the same sort. to make this plain by an example, suppose a geometrician is demonstrating the method of cutting a line in two equal parts. he draws, for instance, a black line of an inch in length: this, which in itself is a particular line, is nevertheless with regard to its signification general, since, as it is there used, it represents all particular lines whatsoever; so that what is demonstrated of it is demonstrated of all lines, or, in other words, of a line in general. and, as that particular line becomes general by being made a sign, so the name line, which taken absolutely is particular, by being a sign is made general. and as the former owes its generality not to its being the sign of an abstract or general line, but of all particular right lines that may possibly exist, so the latter must be thought to derive its generality from the same cause, namely, the various particular lines which it indifferently denotes.
we shall be better placed to understand what makes a word a general term if we first understand how ideas become general. i emphasize that i don't deny that there are general ideas only that there are abstract general ideas. in the passages i have quoted, every mention of general ideas carries the assumption that they are formed by abstraction in the manner described in 7 and 9 above. if we want to speak meaningfully and not say things that we can't make sense of, i think we shall agree to the following. an idea, which considered in itself is particular, becomes general in its meaning by being made to represent or stand for all other particular ideas of the same sort as itself. suppose for example that a geometrician, proving the validity of a procedure for cutting a line in two equal parts, draws a black line one inch long. as used in this geometrical proof, this particular line is general in its significance because it is used to represent all particular lines, so that what is proved regarding it is proved to hold for all lines. and just as that particular line becomes general by being used as a sign, so the word line which in itself is particular is used as a sign with a general meaning. the line is general because it is the sign not of an abstract or general line but of all particular straight lines that could exist, and the word is general for the same reason namely that it stands equally well for each and every particular line.

but they are not necessary for communication. much is here said of the difficulty that abstract ideas carry with them, and the pains and skill requisite to the forming them. and it is on all hands agreed that there is need of great toil and labour of the mind, to emancipate our thoughts from particular objects, and raise them to those sublime speculations that are conversant about abstract ideas. from all which the natural consequence should seem to be, that so difficult a thing as the forming abstract ideas was not necessary for communication, which is so easy and familiar to all sorts of men. but, we are told, if they seem obvious and easy to grown men, it is only because by constant and familiar use they are made so. now, i would fain know at what time it is men are employed in surmounting that difficulty, and furnishing themselves with those necessary helps for discourse. it cannot be when they are grown up, for then it seems they are not conscious of any such painstaking; it remains therefore to be the business of their childhood. and surely the great and multiplied labour of framing abstract notions will be found a hard task for that tender age. is it not a hard thing to imagine that a couple of children cannot prate together of their sugar-plums and rattles and the rest of their little trinkets, till they have first tacked together numberless inconsistencies, and so framed in their minds abstract general ideas, and annexed them to every common name they make use of?
much is said by locke about how difficult abstract ideas are about the care and skill that is needed in forming them. and everyone agrees that it takes hard mental work to free our thoughts from particular objects and raise them to the level of theorizing that involves abstract ideas. it would seem to follow that the forming of abstract ideas is too difficult to be necessary for communication, which is so easy and familiar for all sorts of people. but, we are told by locke, replying to this point, that if adults find abstract ideas easy to form, that's only because they have become good at it through long practice. well, i would like to know when it is that people are busy overcoming that difficulty and equipping themselves with what they need for communication! it can't be when they are grown up, for by then they can communicate, so that it seems the difficulty is behind them; so it has to be something they do in their childhood. but surely the labour of forming abstract notions with so many to be formed, and each of them so difficult is too hard a task for that tender age. who could believe that a couple of children cannot chatter about sugar-plums and toys until they have first tacked together numberless inconsistencies and so formed abstract general ideas in their minds, attaching them to every common name they make use of?

objection. answer. but here it will be demanded, how we can know any proposition to be true of all particular triangles, except we have first seen it demonstrated of the abstract idea of a triangle which equally agrees to all? for, because a property may be demonstrated to agree to some one particular triangle, it will not thence follow that it equally belongs to any other triangle, which in all respects is not the same with it. for example, having demonstrated that the three angles of an isosceles rectangular triangle are equal to two right ones, i cannot therefore conclude this affection agrees to all other triangles which have neither a right angle nor two equal sides. it seems therefore that, to be certain this proposition is universally true, we must either make a particular demonstration for every particular triangle, which is impossible, or once for all demonstrate it of the abstract idea of a triangle, in which all the particulars do indifferently partake and by which they are all equally represented. to which i answer, that, though the idea i have in view whilst i make the demonstration be, for instance, that of an isosceles rectangular triangle whose sides are of a determinate length, i may nevertheless be certain it extends to all other rectilinear triangles, of what sort or bigness soever. and that because neither the right angle, nor the equality, nor determinate length of the sides are at all concerned in the demonstration. it is true the diagram i have in view includes all these particulars, but then there is not the least mention made of them in the proof of the proposition. it is not said the three angles are equal to two right ones, because one of them is a right angle, or because the sides comprehending it are of the same length. which sufficiently shows that the right angle might have been oblique, and the sides unequal, and for all that the demonstration have held good. and for this reason it is that i conclude that to be true of any obliquangular or scalenon which i had demonstrated of a particular right angled equicrural triangle, and not because i demonstrated the proposition of the abstract idea of a triangle and here it must be acknowledged that a man may consider a figure merely as triangular, without attending to the particular qualities of the angles, or relations of the sides. so far he may abstract; but this will never prove that he can frame an abstract, general, inconsistent idea of a triangle. in like manner we may consider peter so far forth as man, or so far forth as animal without framing the fore-mentioned abstract idea, either of man or of animal, inasmuch as all that is perceived is not considered.
you may want to make this objection: how can we know any proposition to be true of all particular triangles unless we first see it demonstrated of the abstract idea of a triangle that fits all the particular ones? just because a property can be demonstrated to belong to some one particular triangle, it doesn't follow that it equally belongs to any other triangle that differs in some way from the first one. for example, having demonstrated of an isosceles right-angled triangle that its three angles are equal to two right ones, i can't conclude from this that the same holds for all other triangles that don't have a right angle and two equal sides. if we are to be certain that this proposition is universally true, it seems, we must either prove it of every particular triangle which is impossible or prove it once and for all of the abstract idea of a triangle, in which all the particulars are involved and by which they are all equally represented. to this i answer that although the idea i have in view while i make the demonstration may be for instance that of an isosceles right-angled triangle whose sides are of a determinate length, i can still be certain that it applies also to all other triangles, no matter what their sort or size. i can be sure of this because neither the right angle nor the equality of sides nor length of the sides has any role in the demonstration. it is true that the diagram i have in view in the proof includes all these details, but they aren't mentioned in the proof of the proposition. it isn't said that the three angles are equal to two right ones because one of them is a right angle, or because the sides that form it are of the same length. this shows that the demonstration could have held good even if the right angle had been oblique and the sides unequal. that is why i conclude that the proposition holds for all triangles, having demonstrated it in a certain way to hold for a particular right-angled isosceles triangle not because i demonstrated it to hold for the abstract idea of a triangle! i don't deny that a man can abstract, in that he can consider a figure merely as triangular without attending to the particular qualities of the angles or relations of the sides. but that doesn't show that he can form an abstract general inconsistent idea of a triangle. similarly, because all that is perceived is not considered, we may think about peter considered as a man, or considered as an animal, without framing the abstract idea of man or of animal.

advantage of investigating the doctrine of abstract general ideas. it were an endless as well as an useless thing to trace the schoolmen, those great masters of abstraction, through all the manifold inextricable labyrinths of error and dispute which their doctrine of abstract natures and notions seems to have led them into. what bickerings and controversies, and what a learned dust have been raised about those matters, and what mighty advantage has been from thence derived to mankind, are things at this day too clearly known to need being insisted on. and it had been well if the ill effects of that doctrine were confined to those only who make the most avowed profession of it. when men consider the great pains, industry, and parts that have for so many ages been laid out on the cultivation and advancement of the sciences, and that notwithstanding all this the far greater part of them remains full of darkness and uncertainty, and disputes that are like never to have an end, and even those that are thought to be supported by the most clear and cogent demonstrations contain in them paradoxes which are perfectly irreconcilable to the understandings of men, and that, taking all together, a very small portion of them does supply any real benefit to mankind, otherwise than by being an innocent diversion and amusement i say the consideration of all this is apt to throw them into a despondency and perfect contempt of all study. but this may perhaps cease upon a view of the false principles that have obtained in the world, amongst all which there is none, methinks, has a more wide and extended sway over the thoughts of speculative men than this of abstract general ideas.
it would be an endless and a useless task to trace the scholastic philosophers, those great masters of abstraction, through all the tangling labyrinths of error and dispute that their doctrine of abstract natures and notions seems to have led them into. what bickerings and controversies have arisen about those matters, and what great good they have brought to mankind, are well enough known these days, and i needn't go on about them. it would have been better if the bad effects of that doctrine of abstract natures and notions had been confined to the people who most openly adhered to it. but the bad effects have spread further. when men consider that the advancement of knowledge has been pursued with great care, hard work, and high abilities, and yet most branches of knowledge remain full of darkness and uncertainty, and of disputes that seem likely never to end; and that even propositions thought to be supported by the most clear and compelling demonstrations contain paradoxes that are utterly at variance with the understandings of men; and that only a small portion of them brings any real benefit to mankind other than as an innocent diversion and amusement; the consideration of all this is apt to make people depressed, and to give them a complete contempt for all study. perhaps this will cease when we have a view of the false principles that people have accepted, of which i think the one that has had the widest influence over the thoughts of enquiring and theory-building men is the doctrine of abstract general ideas.

secondly, but, to give a farther account how words came to produce the doctrine of abstract ideas, it must be observed that it is a received opinion that language has no other end but the communicating our ideas, and that every significant name stands for an idea. this being so, and it being withal certain that names which yet are not thought altogether insignificant do not always mark out particular conceivable ideas, it is straightway concluded that they stand for abstract notions. that there are many names in use amongst speculative men which do not always suggest to others determinate, particular ideas, or in truth anything at all, is what nobody will deny. and a little attention will discover that it is not necessary even in the strictest reasonings significant names which stand for ideas should, every time they are used, excite in the understanding the ideas they are made to stand for in reading and discoursing, names being for the most part used as letters are in algebra, in which, though a particular quantity be marked by each letter, yet to proceed right it is not requisite that in every step each letter suggest to your thoughts that particular quantity it was appointed to stand for.
2 words helped in another way to produce the doctrine of abstract ideas, namely through the widespread opinion that language is for the communicating of our ideas and for nothing else, and that every significant name stands for an idea. people who think this, and who can see the obvious fact that some names that are regarded as significant don't have particular specific ideas corresponding to them, conclude that such names must stand for abstract notions. now, nobody will deny that many names that are in use amongst thoughtful people don't always put determinate particular ideas into the minds of listeners. and even when a name does stand for ideas, it doesn't have to arouse them in the listener's mind every time it is used, even in the strictest reasonings. that is because in reading and conversation names are mostly used as letters are in algebra: each letter stands for a particular number, but you can conduct a proof accurately without at each step having each letter bring to mind the particular number it is meant to stand for.

caution in the use of language necessary. we have, i think, shown the impossibility of abstract ideas. we have considered what has been said for them by their ablest patrons; and endeavored to show they are of no use for those ends to which they are thought necessary. and lastly, we have traced them to the source from whence they flow, which appears evidently to be language. it cannot be denied that words are of excellent use, in that by their means all that stock of knowledge which has been purchased by the joint labours of inquisitive men in all ages and nations may be drawn into the view and made the possession of one single person. but at the same time it must be owned that most parts of knowledge have been strangely perplexed and darkened by the abuse of words, and general ways of speech wherein they are delivered. since therefore words are so apt to impose on the understanding, whatever ideas i consider, i shall endeavour to take them bare and naked into my view, keeping out of my thoughts so far as i am able, those names which long and constant use has so strictly united with them; from which i may expect to derive the following advantages:
i think i have shown the impossibility of abstract ideas. i have considered what has been said on their behalf by their ablest supporters, and have tried to show they are of no use for the purposes for which they are thought to be necessary. and, lastly, i have traced them to their source, which appears to be language. it can't be denied that words are extremely useful: they make it possible for all the knowledge that has been gained by the enquiries of men at many times and in all nations to be pulled together and surveyed by a single person. but at the same time it must be admitted that most branches of knowledge have been made enormously much darker and more difficult by the misuse of words and turns of phrase. therefore, since words are so apt to influence our thoughts, when i want to consider any ideas i shall try to take them bare and naked, keeping out of my thoughts as much as i can the names that those ideas have been given through long and constant use. from this i expect to get the following three advantages:-

first, i shall be sure to get clear of all controversies purely verbal the springing up of which weeds in almost all the sciences has been a main hindrance to the growth of true and sound knowledge. secondly, this seems to be a sure way to extricate myself out of that fine and subtle net of abstract ideas which has so miserably perplexed and entangled the minds of men; and that with this peculiar circumstance, that by how much the finer and more curious was the wit of any man, by so much the deeper was he likely to be ensnared and faster held therein. thirdly, so long as i confine my thoughts to my own ideas divested of words, i do not see how i can easily be mistaken. the objects i consider, i clearly and adequately know. i cannot be deceived in thinking i have an idea which i have not. it is not possible for me to imagine that any of my own ideas are alike or unlike that are not truly so. to discern the agreements or disagreements there are between my ideas, to see what ideas are included in any compound idea and what not, there is nothing more requisite than an attentive perception of what passes in my own understanding.
first, i shall be sure to keep clear of all purely verbal controversies those weeds whose springing up, in almost all branches of knowledge, has been a principal hindrance to the growth of true and sound knowledge. secondly, this seems to be a sure way to extricate myself from that fine and delicate net of abstract ideas, which has so miserably perplexed and entangled the minds of men with this special feature: the more sharp-witted and exploratory any man's mind is, the more completely he is likely to be trapped and held by the net!. thirdly, so long as i confine my thoughts to my own ideas with the words peeled off, i don't see how i can easily be mistaken. the objects that i consider are all ones that i clearly and adequately know: i can't fall into error by thinking i have an idea that i really don't have, or by imagining that two of my own ideas are alike or that they are unalike when really they are not. to observe how my ideas agree or disagree, and to see which ideas are included in any compound idea and which are not, all i need is to pay attention to what happens in my own understanding.

but the attainment of all these advantages doth presuppose an entire deliverance from the deception of words, which i dare hardly promise myself; so difficult a thing it is to dissolve an union so early begun, and confirmed by so long a habit as that betwixt words and ideas. which difficulty seems to have been very much increased by the doctrine of abstraction. for, so long as men thought abstract ideas were annexed to their words, it doth not seem strange that they should use words for ideas it being found an impracticable thing to lay aside the word, and retain the abstract idea in the mind, which in itself was perfectly inconceivable. this seems to me the principal cause why those men who have so emphatically recommended to others the laying aside all use of words in their meditations, and contemplating their bare ideas, have yet failed to perform it themselves. of late many have been very sensible of the absurd opinions and insignificant disputes which grow out of the abuse of words. and, in order to remedy these evils, they advise well, that we attend to the ideas signified, and draw off our attention from the words which signify them. but, how good soever this advice may be they have given others, it is plain they could not have a due regard to it themselves, so long as they thought the only immediate use of words was to signify ideas, and that the immediate signification of every general name was a determinate abstract idea.
but i can't get all these advantages unless i free myself entirely from the deception of words. i hardly dare promise myself that, because the union between words and ideas began early and has been strengthened by many years of habit in thought and speech, making it very difficult to dissolve. this difficulty seems to have been very much increased by the doctrine of abstraction. for so long as men thought their words have abstract ideas tied to them, it isn't surprising that they used words in place of ideas: they found that they couldn't set aside the word and retain the abstract idea in the mind, because abstract ideas are perfectly inconceivable. that is the principal cause for the fact that men who have emphatically recommended to others that in their meditations they should lay aside all use of words and instead contemplate their bare ideas have failed to do this themselves. recently many people have become aware of the absurd opinions and meaningless disputes that grow out of the misuse of words. and they had given good advice about how to remedy these troubles namely that we should attend not to the words that signify ideas but rather to the ideas themselves. but however good this advice that they have given others may be, they obviously couldn't properly follow it themselves so long as they thought that the only immediate use of words was to signify ideas, and that the immediate signification of every general name was a determinate, abstract idea.

but, these being known to be mistakes, a man may with greater ease prevent his being imposed on by words. he that knows he has no other than particular ideas, will not puzzle himself in vain to find out and conceive the abstract idea annexed to any name. and he that knows names do not always stand for ideas will spare himself the labour of looking for ideas where there are none to be had. it were, therefore, to be wished that everyone would use his utmost endeavours to obtain a clear view of the ideas he would consider, separating from them all that dress and incumbrance of words which so much contribute to blind the judgment and divide the attention. in vain do we extend our view into the heavens and pry into the entrails of the earth, in vain do we consult the writings of learned men and trace the dark footsteps of antiquity we need only draw the curtain of words, to hold the fairest tree of knowledge, whose fruit is excellent, and within the reach of our hand.
but when you know that these are mistakes, you can more easily prevent your thoughts from being influenced by words. someone who knows that he has only particular ideas won't waste his time trying to conceive the abstract idea that goes with any name. and someone who knows that names don't always stand for ideas will spare himself the labour of looking for ideas where there are none to be had. so it is desirable that everyone should try as hard as he can to obtain a clear view of the ideas he wants to consider, separating from them all the clothing and clutter of words that so greatly blind our judgment and scatter our attention. in vain do we extend our view into the heavens, and presumably into the entrails of the earth; in vain do we consult the writings of learned men, and trace the dark footsteps of antiquity; we need only draw aside the curtain of words, to behold the fairest tree of knowledge, whose fruit, namely, our bare naked ideas, is excellent and lies within reach of our hand.

unless we take care to clear the first principles of knowledge from the embarras and delusion of words, we may make infinite reasonings upon them to no purpose; we may draw consequences from consequences, and be never the wiser. the farther we go, we shall only lose ourselves the more irrecoverably, and be the deeper entangled in difficulties and mistakes. whoever therefore designs to read the following sheets, i entreat him to make my words the occasion of his own thinking, and endeavour to attain the same train of thoughts in reading that i had in writing them. by this means it will be easy for him to discover the truth or falsity of what i say. he will be out of all danger of being deceived by my words, and i do not see how he can be led into an error by considering his own naked, undisguised ideas. of the principles of human knowledge
unless we take care to clear the first principles of knowledge from being burdened and deluded by words, we can reason from them for ever without achieving anything; we can draw consequences from consequences and be never the wiser. the further we go, the more deeply and irrecoverably we shall be lost and entangled in difficulties and mistakes. to anyone who plans to read the following pages, therefore, i say: make my words the occasion of your own thinking, and try to have the same sequence of thoughts in reading that i had in writing. this will make it easy for you to discover the truth or falsity of what i say. you will run no risk of being deceived by my words, and i don't see how you can be led into an error by considering your own naked, undisguised ideas.

objects of human knowledge. it is evident to any one who takes a survey of the objects of human knowledge, that they are either ideas actually imprinted on the senses; or else such as are perceived by attending to the passions and operations of the mind; or lastly, ideas formed by help of memory and imagination either compounding, dividing, or barely representing those originally perceived in the aforesaid ways. by sight i have the ideas of light and colours, with their several degrees and variations. by touch i perceive hard and soft, heat and cold, motion and resistance, and of all these more and less either as to quantity or degree. smelling furnishes me with odours; the palate with tastes; and hearing conveys sounds to the mind in all their variety of tone and composition. and as several of these are observed to accompany each other, they come to be marked by one name, and so to be reputed as one thing. thus, for example a certain colour, taste, smell, figure and consistence having been observed to go together, are accounted one distinct thing, signified by the name apple. other collections of ideas constitute a stone, a tree, a book, and the like sensible things which as they are pleasing or disagreeable excite the passions of love, hatred, joy, grief, and so forth.
anyone who surveys the objects of human knowledge will easily see that they are all ideas that are either actually imprinted on the senses or perceived by attending to one's own emotions and mental activities or formed out of ideas of the first two types, with the help of memory and imagination, by compounding or dividing or simply reproducing ideas of those other two kinds. by sight i have the ideas of light and colours with their different degrees and variations. by touch i perceive hard and soft, heat and cold, motion and resistance, and so on; and each of these also admits of differences of quantity or degree. smelling supplies me with odours; the palate with tastes; and hearing conveys sounds to the mind in all their variety of tone and composition. and when a number of these are observed to accompany each other, they come to be marked by one name and thus to be thought of as one thing. thus, for example, a certain colour, taste, smell, shape and consistency having been observed to go together, they are taken to be one distinct thing, called an apple. other collections of ideas constitute a stone, a tree, a book, and similar perceptible things; and these can arouse the emotions of love, hate, joy, grief, and so on, depending on whether they please or displease us.

mind spirit soul. but, besides all that endless variety of ideas or objects of knowledge, there is likewise something which knows or perceives them, and exercises divers operations, as willing, imagining, remembering, about them. this perceiving, active being is what i call mind, spirit, soul, or myself. by which words i do not denote any one of my ideas, but a thing entirely distinct from them, wherein they exist, or, which is the same thing, whereby they are perceived for the existence of an idea consists in being perceived.
as well as all that endless variety of ideas, or objects of knowledge, there is also something that knows or perceives them, and acts on them in various ways such as willing, imagining, and remembering. this perceiving, active entity is what i call mind, spirit, soul, or myself. these words don't refer to any one of my ideas, but rather to something entirely distinct from them, something in which they exist, or by which they are perceived. those two are equivalent, because the existence of an idea consists in its being perceived.

how far the assent of the vulgar conceded. that neither our thoughts, nor passions, nor ideas formed by the imagination, exist without the mind, is what everybody will allow. and it seems no less evident that the various sensations or ideas imprinted on the sense, however blended or combined together that is, whatever objects they compose, cannot exist otherwise than in a mind perceiving them. i think an intuitive knowledge may be obtained of this by any one that shall attend to what is meant by the term exist, when applied to sensible things. the table i write on i say exists, that is, i see and feel it; and if i were out of my study i should say it existed meaning thereby that if i was in my study i might perceive it, or that some other spirit actually does perceive it. there was an odour, that is, it was smelt; there was a sound, that is, it was heard; a colour or figure, and it was perceived by sight or touch. this is all that i can understand by these and the like expressions. for as to what is said of the absolute existence of unthinking things without any relation to their being perceived, that seems perfectly unintelligible. their esse is percipi, nor is it possible they should have any existence out of the minds or thinking things which perceive them.
everyone will agree that our thoughts, emotions, and ideas of the imagination exist only in the mind. it seems to me equally obvious that the various sensations or ideas that are imprinted on our senses cannot exist except in a mind that perceives them no matter how they are blended or combined together that is, no matter what objects they constitute. you can know this intuitively by attending to what is meant by the term exist when it is applied to perceptible things. the table that i am writing on exists, that is, i see and feel it; and if i were out of my study i would still say that it existed, meaning that if i were in my study i would perceive it, or that some other spirit actually does perceive it. similarly, there was an odour i.e. it was smelled; there was a sound it was heard; there was a colour or shape it was seen or felt. this is all that i can understand by such expressions as these. there are those who speak of things that unlike spirits do not think and unlike ideas exist whether or not they are perceived; but that seems to be perfectly unintelligible. for unthinking things, to exist is to be perceived; so they couldn't possibly exist out of the minds or thinking things that perceive them.

the vulgar opinion involves a contradiction. it is indeed an opinion strangely prevailing amongst men, that houses, mountains, rivers, and in a word all sensible objects, have an existence, natural or real, distinct from their being perceived by the understanding. but, with how great an assurance and acquiescence soever this principle may be entertained in the world, yet whoever shall find in his heart to call it in question may, if i mistake not, perceive it to involve a manifest contradiction. for, what are the fore-mentioned objects but the things we perceive by sense? and what do we perceive besides our own ideas or sensations? and is it not plainly repugnant that any one of these, or any combination of them, should exist unperceived?
it is indeed widely believed that all perceptible objects houses, mountains, rivers, and so on really exist independently of being perceived by the understanding. but however widely and confidently this belief may be held, anyone who has the courage to challenge it will if i'm not mistaken see that it involves an obvious contradiction. for what are houses, mountains, rivers etc. but things we perceive by sense? and what do we perceive besides our own ideas or sensations? and isn't it plainly contradictory that these, either singly or in combination, should exist unperceived?

cause of this prevalent error. if we thoroughly examine this tenet it will, perhaps, be found at bottom to depend on the doctrine of abstract ideas. for can there be a nicer strain of abstraction than to distinguish the existence of sensible objects from their being perceived, so as to conceive them existing unperceived? light and colours, heat and cold, extension and figures in a word the things we see and feel what are they but so many sensations, notions, ideas, or impressions on the sense? and is it possible to separate, even in thought, any of these from perception? for my part, i might as easily divide a thing from itself. i may, indeed, divide in my thoughts, or conceive apart from each other, those things which, perhaps i never perceived by sense so divided. thus, i imagine the trunk of a human body without the limbs, or conceive the smell of a rose without thinking on the rose itself. so far, i will not deny, i can abstract if that may properly be called abstraction which extends only to the conceiving separately such objects as it is possible may really exist or be actually perceived asunder. but my conceiving or imagining power does not extend beyond the possibility of real existence or perception. hence, as it is impossible for me to see or feel anything without an actual sensation of that thing, so is it impossible for me to conceive in my thoughts any sensible thing or object distinct from the sensation or perception of it.
if we thoroughly examine this belief in things existing independently of the mind it will, perhaps, be found to depend basically on the doctrine of abstract ideas. for can there be a more delicate and precise strain of abstraction than to distinguish the existence of perceptible things from their being perceived, so as to conceive them existing unperceived? light and colours, heat and cold, extension and shapes, in a word the things we see and feel what are they but so many sensations, notions, ideas, or sense impressions? and can any of these be separated, even in thought, from perception? speaking for myself, i would find it no easier to do that than to divide a thing from itself! i don't deny that i can abstract if indeed this is properly called abstraction by conceiving separately objects that can exist separately, even if i have never experienced them apart from one another. i can for example imagine a human torso without the limbs, or conceive the smell of a rose without thinking of the rose itself. but my power of conceiving or imagining goes no further than that: it doesn't extend beyond the limits of what can actually exist or be perceived. therefore, because i can't possibly see or feel a thing without having an actual sensation of it, i also can't possibly conceive of a perceptible thing distinct from the sensation or perception of it.

some truths there are so near and obvious to the mind that a man need only open his eyes to see them. such i take this important one to be, viz., that all the choir of heaven and furniture of the earth, in a word all those bodies which compose the mighty frame of the world, have not any subsistence without a mind, that their being esse is to be perceived or known; that consequently so long as they are not actually perceived by me, or do not exist in my mind or that of any other created spirit, they must either have no existence at all, or else subsist in the mind of some eternal spirit it being perfectly unintelligible, and involving all the absurdity of abstraction, to attribute to any single part of them an existence independent of a spirit. to be convinced of which, the reader need only reflect, and try to separate in his own thoughts the being of a sensible thing from its being perceived.
some truths are so close to the mind, and so obvious, that as soon as you open your eyes you will see them. here is an important truth of that kind: all the choir of heaven and furniture of the earth, in a word all those bodies that compose the mighty structure of the world, have no existence outside a mind; for them to exist is for them to be perceived or known; consequently so long as they aren't actually perceived by i.e. don't exist in the mind of myself or any other created spirit, they must either have no existence at all or else exist in the mind of some eternal spirit; because it makes no sense and involves all the absurdity of abstraction to attribute to any such thing an existence independent of a spirit. to be convinced of this, you need only to reflect and try to separate in your own thoughts the existence of a perceptible thing from its being perceived you'll find that you can't.

second argument. from what has been said it follows there is not any other substance than spirit, or that which perceives. but, for the fuller proof of this point, let it be considered the sensible qualities are colour, figure, motion, smell, taste, etc., i.e. the ideas perceived by sense. now, for an idea to exist in an unperceiving thing is a manifest contradiction, for to have an idea is all one as to perceive; that therefore wherein colour, figure, and the like qualities exist must perceive them; hence it is clear there can be no unthinking substance or substratum of those ideas.
from what i have said it follows that the only substances are spirits things that perceive. another argument for the same conclusion is the following down to the end of the section. the perceptible qualities are colour, shape, motion, smell, taste and so on, and these are ideas perceived by sense. now it is plainly self-contradictory to suppose that an idea might exist in an unperceiving thing, for to have an idea is just the same as to perceive: so whatever has colour, shape and so on must perceive these qualities; from which it clearly follows that there can be no unthinking substance or substratum of those ideas.

objection. answer. but, say you, though the ideas themselves do not exist without the mind, yet there may be things like them, whereof they are copies or resemblances, which things exist without the mind in an unthinking substance. i answer, an idea can be like nothing but an idea; a colour or figure can be like nothing but another colour or figure. if we look but never so little into our thoughts, we shall find it impossible for us to conceive a likeness except only between our ideas. again, i ask whether those supposed originals or external things, of which our ideas are the pictures or representations, be themselves perceivable or no? if they are, then they are ideas and we have gained our point; but if you say they are not, i appeal to any one whether it be sense to assert a colour is like something which is invisible; hard or soft, like something which is intangible; and so of the rest.
but, you say, though the ideas don't exist outside the mind, still there may be things like them of which they are copies or resemblances, and these things may exist outside the mind in an unthinking substance. i answer that the only thing an idea can resemble is another idea; a colour or shape can't be like anything but another colour or shape. attend a little to your own thoughts and you will find that you can't conceive of any likeness except between your ideas. also: tell me about those supposed originals or external things of which our ideas are the pictures or representations are they perceivable or not? if they are, then they are ideas, and i have won the argument; but if you say they are not, i appeal to anyone whether it makes sense to assert that a colour is like something that is invisible; that hard or soft is like something intangible; and similarly for the other qualities.

the philosophical notion of matter involves a contradiction. some there are who make a distinction betwixt primary and secondary qualities. by the former they mean extension, figure, motion, rest, solidity or impenetrability, and number; by the latter they denote all other sensible qualities, as colours, sounds, tastes, and so forth. the ideas we have of these they acknowledge not to be the resemblances of anything existing without the mind, or unperceived, but they will have our ideas of the primary qualities to be patterns or images of things which exist without the mind, in an unthinking substance which they call matter. by matter, therefore, we are to understand an inert, senseless substance, in which extension, figure, and motion do actually subsist. but it is evident from what we have already shown, that extension, figure, and motion are only ideas existing in the mind, and that an idea can be like nothing but another idea, and that consequently neither they nor their archetypes can exist in an unperceiving substance. hence, it is plain that the very notion of what is called matter or corporeal substance, involves a contradiction in it.
some philosophers distinguish primary qualities from secondary qualities: they use the former term to stand for extension, shape, motion, rest, solidity and number; by the latter term they denote all other perceptible qualities, such as colours, sounds, tastes, and so on. our ideas of secondary qualities don't resemble anything existing outside the mind or unperceived, they admit; but they insist that our ideas of primary qualities are patterns or images of things that exist outside the mind in an unthinking substance that they call matter. by matter, therefore, we are to understand an inert, senseless substance in which extension, shape and motion actually exist. but i have already shown that extension, shape, and motion are quite clearly nothing but ideas existing in the mind, and that an idea can't be like anything but another idea, and that consequently neither they nor things from which they are copied can exist in an unperceiving substance. so the very notion of so-called matter, or corporeal substance, clearly involves a contradiction.

argumentum ad hominem. they who assert that figure, motion, and the rest of the primary or original qualities do exist without the mind in unthinking substances, do at the same time acknowledge that colours, sounds, heat cold, and suchlike secondary qualities, do not which they tell us are sensations existing in the mind alone, that depend on and are occasioned by the different size, texture, and motion of the minute particles of matter. this they take for an undoubted truth, which they can demonstrate beyond all exception. now, if it be certain that those original qualities are inseparably united with the other sensible qualities, and not, even in thought, capable of being abstracted from them, it plainly follows that they exist only in the mind. but i desire any one to reflect and try whether he can, by any abstraction of thought, conceive the extension and motion of a body without all other sensible qualities. for my own part, i see evidently that it is not in my power to frame an idea of a body extended and moving, but i must withal give it some colour or other sensible quality which is acknowledged to exist only in the mind. in short, extension, figure, and motion, abstracted from all other qualities, are inconceivable. where therefore the other sensible qualities are, there must these be also, to wit, in the mind and nowhere else.
those who assert that shape, motion and the other primary qualities exist outside the mind in unthinking substances say in the same breath that colours, sounds, heat, cold, and other secondary qualities do not. these, they tell us, are sensations that exist in the mind alone, and depend on the different size, texture, and motion of the minute particles of matter. they offer this as an undoubted truth that they can prove conclusively. now if it is certain that 1 primary qualities are inseparably united with secondary ones, and can't be abstracted from them even in thought, it clearly follows that 2 primary qualities exist only in the mind, just as the secondary ones do. i now defend 1. look in on yourself, and see whether you can perform a mental abstraction that enables you to conceive of a body's being extended and moving without having any other perceptible qualities. speaking for myself, i see quite clearly that i can't form an idea of an extended, moving body unless i also give it some colour or other perceptible quality which is admitted by the philosophers i have been discussing to exist only in the mind. in short, extension, shape and motion, abstracted from all other qualities, are inconceivable. it follows that these primary qualities must be where the secondary ones are namely in the mind and nowhere else.

that number is entirely the creature of the mind, even though the other qualities be allowed to exist without, will be evident to whoever considers that the same thing bears a different denomination of number as the mind views it with different respects. thus, the same extension is one, or three, or thirty-six, according as the mind considers it with reference to a yard, a foot, or an inch. number is so visibly relative, and dependent on men's understanding, that it is strange to think how any one should give it an absolute existence without the mind. we say one book, one page, one line, etc.; all these are equally units, though some contain several of the others. and in each instance, it is plain, the unit relates to some particular combination of ideas arbitrarily put together by the mind.
even if we grant that the other primary qualities exist outside the mind, it must be conceded that number is entirely created by the mind. this will be obvious to anyone who notices that the same thing can be assigned different numbers depending on how the mind views it. thus, the same distance is one or three or thirty-six, depending on whether the mind considers it in terms of yards, feet or inches. number is so obviously relative and dependent on men's understanding that i find it surprising that anyone should ever have credited it with an absolute existence outside the mind. we say one book, one page, one line; all these are equally units that is, each is one something yet the book contains many pages and the page contains many lines. in each case, obviously, what we are saying there is one of is a particular combination of ideas arbitrarily put together by the mind, for example, the arbitrary combination of ideas that we choose to call a book.

unity i know some will have to be a simple or uncompounded idea, accompanying all other ideas into the mind. that i have any such idea answering the word unity i do not find; and if i had, methinks i could not miss finding it: on the contrary, it should be the most familiar to my understanding, since it is said to accompany all other ideas, and to be perceived by all the ways of sensation and reflexion. to say no more, it is an abstract idea.
some philosophers, i realize, hold that unity is a simple or uncompounded idea that accompanies every other idea into the mind. i don't find that i have any such idea corresponding to the word unity. i could hardly overlook it if it were there in my mind: it ought to be the most familiar to me of all my ideas, since it is said to accompany all my other ideas and to be perceived by all the ways of sensation and reflection. in short, it is an abstract idea!

a third argument ad hominem. i shall farther add, that, after the same manner as modern philosophers prove certain sensible qualities to have no existence in matter, or without the mind, the same thing may be likewise proved of all other sensible qualities whatsoever. thus, for instance, it is said that heat and cold are affections only of the mind, and not at all patterns of real beings, existing in the corporeal substances which excite them, for that the same body which appears cold to one hand seems warm to another. now, why may we not as well argue that figure and extension are not patterns or resemblances of qualities existing in matter, because to the same eye at different stations, or eyes of a different texture at the same station, they appear various, and cannot therefore be the images of anything settled and determinate without the mind? again, it is proved that sweetness is not really in the sapid thing, because the thing remaining unaltered the sweetness is changed into bitter, as in case of a fever or otherwise vitiated palate. is it not as reasonable to say that motion is not without the mind, since if the succession of ideas in the mind become swifter, the motion, it is acknowledged, shall appear slower without any alteration in any external object?
here is a further point. some modern philosophers argue that certain perceptible qualities have no existence in matter or outside the mind; their arguments can be used to prove the same thing of all perceptible qualities whatsoever. they point out for instance that a body that appears cold to one hand seems warm to the other, from which they infer that heat and cold are only states of the mind and don't resemble anything in the corporeal substances that cause them. if that argument is good, then why can't we re-apply it to prove that shape and extension don't resemble any fixed and determinate qualities existing in matter, because they appear differently to the same eye in different positions, or eyes in different states in the same position? again, they argue that sweetness isn't really in the thing that is described as sweet, because sweetness can be changed into bitterness without there being any alteration in the thing itself because the person's palate has been affected by a fever or some other harm. is it not equally reasonable to argue that motion isn't outside the mind because a thing will appear to move more or less quickly without any change in the thing itself depending on whether the succession of ideas in the observer's mind is slow or fast?

not conclusive as to extension. in short, let any one consider those arguments which are thought manifestly to prove that colours and taste exist only in the mind, and he shall find they may with equal force be brought to prove the same thing of extension, figure, and motion. though it must be confessed this method of arguing does not so much prove that there is no extension or colour in an outward object, as that we do not know by sense which is the true extension or colour of the object. but the arguments foregoing plainly show it to be impossible that any colour or extension at all, or other sensible quality whatsoever, should exist in an unthinking subject without the mind, or in truth, that there should be any such thing as an outward object.
in short, the arguments that are thought to prove that colours and tastes exist only in the mind have as much force to prove the same thing of extension, shape and motion. really, though, these arguments don't prove that there is no extension or colour in an outward object, but only that our senses don't tell us what an object's true extension or colour is. my own previous arguments do better: they clearly show it to be impossible that any colour or extension or other perceptible quality should exist in an unthinking thing outside the mind, or indeed that there should be any such thing as an object outside the mind.

but let us examine a little the received opinion. it is said extension is a mode or accident of matter, and that matter is the substratum that supports it. now i desire that you would explain to me what is meant by matter's supporting extension. say you, i have no idea of matter and therefore cannot explain it. i answer, though you have no positive, yet, if you have any meaning at all, you must at least have a relative idea of matter; though you know not what it is, yet you must be supposed to know what relation it bears to accidents, and what is meant by its supporting them. it is evident support cannot here be taken in its usual or literal sense as when we say that pillars support a building; in what sense therefore must it be taken?
but let us examine the usual opinion a little further. it is said that extension is a quality of matter, and that matter is the substratum that supports it. please explain to me what is meant by matter's supporting extension. you reply: i have no idea of matter; so i can't explain it. i answer: even if you have no positive meaning for matter that is, have no idea of what matter is like in itself you must at least have a relative idea of it, so that you know how matter relates to qualities, and what it means to say that it supports them. if you don't even know that, you have no meaning at all in what you are saying. explain support, then! obviously it cannot be meant here in its usual or literal sense, as when we say that pillars support a building: in what sense, then, are we to understand it?

philosophical meaning of material substance divisible into two parts. if we inquire into what the most accurate philosophers declare themselves to mean by material substance, we shall find them acknowledge they have no other meaning annexed to those sounds but the idea of being in general, together with the relative notion of its supporting accidents. the general idea of being appeareth to me the most abstract and incomprehensible of all other; and as for its supporting accidents, this, as we have just now observed, cannot be understood in the common sense of those words; it must therefore be taken in some other sense, but what that is they do not explain. so that when i consider the two parts or branches which make the signification of the words material substance, i am convinced there is no distinct meaning annexed to them. but why should we trouble ourselves any farther, in discussing this material substratum or support of figure and motion, and other sensible qualities? does it not suppose they have an existence without the mind? and is not this a direct repugnancy, and altogether inconceivable?
when we attend to what the most carefully precise philosophers say they mean by material substance, we find them admitting that the only meaning they can give to those sounds is the idea of being in general, together with the relative notion of its supporting qualities. the general idea of being seems to me the most abstract and incomprehensible of all. as for its supporting qualities: since this cannot be understood in the ordinary sense of those words as i have just pointed out, it must be taken in some other sense; but we aren't told what that other sense is. i am sure, therefore, that there is no clear meaning in either of the two parts or strands that are supposed to make up the meaning of the words material substance. anyway, why should we trouble ourselves any further in discussing this material substratum or support of shape and motion and other perceptible qualities? whatever we make of its details the notions of being in general, and of support it is clearly being said that shape and motion and the rest exist outside the mind. isn't this a direct contradiction, and altogether inconceivable?

the existence of external bodies wants proof. but, though it were possible that solid, figured, movable substances may exist without the mind, corresponding to the ideas we have of bodies, yet how is it possible for us to know this? either we must know it by sense or by reason. as for our senses, by them we have the knowledge only of our sensations, ideas, or those things that are immediately perceived by sense, call them what you will: but they do not inform us that things exist without the mind, or unperceived, like to those which are perceived. this the materialists themselves acknowledge. it remains therefore that if we have any knowledge at all of external things, it must be by reason, inferring their existence from what is immediately perceived by sense. but what reason can induce us to believe the existence of bodies without the mind, from what we perceive, since the very patrons of matter themselves do not pretend there is any necessary connexion betwixt them and our ideas? i say it is granted on all hands and what happens in dreams, phrensies, and the like, puts it beyond dispute that it is possible we might be affected with all the ideas we have now, though there were no bodies existing without resembling them. hence, it is evident the supposition of external bodies is not necessary for the producing our ideas; since it is granted they are produced sometimes, and might possibly be produced always in the same order, we see them in at present, without their concurrence.
suppose it were possible for solid, figured, movable substances to exist outside the mind, corresponding to the ideas we have of bodies how could we possibly know that there are any such things? we must know it either by sense or by reason. our senses give us knowledge only of our sensations ideas things that are immediately perceived by sense call them what you will! they don't inform us that outside the mind that is, unperceive there exist things that resemble the item s that are perceived. the materialists themselves admit this. so if we are to have any knowledge of external things, it must be by reason, inferring their existence from what is immediately perceived by sense. but what reasons can lead us from the ideas that we perceive to a belief in the existence of bodies outside the mind? the supporters of matter themselves don't claim that there is any necessary connection between material things and our ideas. we could have all the ideas that we now have without there being any bodies existing outside us that resemble them; everyone admits this, and what happens in dreams, hallucinations and so on puts it beyond dispute. evidently, then, we aren't compelled to suppose that there are external bodies as causes of our ideas. those ideas are sometimes, so they could be always, produced without help from bodies yet falling into the patterns that they do in fact exhibit.

the existence of external bodies affords no explication of the manner in which our ideas are produced. but, though we might possibly have all our sensations without them, yet perhaps it may be thought easier to conceive and explain the manner of their production, by supposing external bodies in their likeness rather than otherwise; and so it might be at least probable there are such things as bodies that excite their ideas in our minds. but neither can this be said; for, though we give the materialists their external bodies, they by their own confession are never the nearer knowing how our ideas are produced; since they own themselves unable to comprehend in what manner body can act upon spirit, or how it is possible it should imprint any idea in the mind. hence it is evident the production of ideas or sensations in our minds can be no reason why we should suppose matter or corporeal substances, since that is acknowledged to remain equally inexplicable with or without this supposition. if therefore it were possible for bodies to exist without the mind, yet to hold they do so, must needs be a very precarious opinion; since it is to suppose, without any reason at all, that god has created innumerable beings that are entirely useless, and serve to no manner of purpose.
even though external bodies aren't absolutely needed to explain our sensations, you might think, the course of our experience is easier to explain on the supposition of external bodies than it is without that supposition. so it is at least probable there are bodies that cause our minds to have ideas of them. but this is not tenable either. the materialists admit that they cannot understand how body can act upon spirit, or how it is possible for a body to imprint any idea in a mind; and that is tantamount to admitting that they don't know how our ideas are produced. so the production of ideas or sensations in our minds can't be a reason for supposing the existence of matter or corporeal substances, because it admittedly remains a mystery with or without that supposition. so even if it were possible for bodies to exist outside the mind, the belief that they actually do so must be a very shaky one; since it involves supposing, without any reason at all, that god has created countless things that are entirely useless and serve no purpose.

dilemma. in short, if there were external bodies, it is impossible we should ever come to know it; and if there were not, we might have the very same reasons to think there were that we have now. suppose what no one can deny possible an intelligence without the help of external bodies, to be affected with the same train of sensations or ideas that you are, imprinted in the same order and with like vividness in his mind. i ask whether that intelligence has not all the reason to believe the existence of corporeal substances, represented by his ideas, and exciting them in his mind, that you can possibly have for believing the same thing? of this there can be no question which one consideration were enough to make any reasonable person suspect the strength of whatever arguments be may think himself to have, for the existence of bodies without the mind.
in short, if there were external bodies, we couldn't possibly come to know this; and if there weren't, we might have the very same reasons to think there were that we have now. no-one can deny the following to be possible: a thinking being might, without the help of external bodies, be affected with the same series of sensations or ideas that you have, imprinted in the same order and with similar vividness in his mind. if that happened, wouldn't that thinking being have all the reason to believe there are corporeal substances that are represented by my ideas and cause them in my mind that you can possibly have for believing the same thing? of course he would; and that consideration is enough, all on its own, to make any reasonable person suspect the strength of whatever arguments he may think he has for the existence of bodies outside the mind.

were it necessary to add any further proof against the existence of matter after what has been said, i could instance several of those errors and difficulties not to mention impieties which have sprung from that tenet. it has occasioned numberless controversies and disputes in philosophy, and not a few of far greater moment in religion. but i shall not enter into the detail of them in this place, as well because i think arguments a posteriori are unnecessary for confirming what has been, if i mistake not, sufficiently demonstrated a priori, as because i shall hereafter find occasion to speak somewhat of them.
if, even after what has been said, more arguments were needed against the existence of matter, i could cite many errors and difficulties not to mention impieties that have sprung from that doctrine. it has led to countless controversies and disputes in philosophy, and many even more important ones in religion. but i shan't go into the details of them here, because i think arguments about materialism's bad consequences are unnecessary for confirming what has, i think, been well enough proved a priori regarding its intrinsic defects, and the lack of good reasons to support it.

i am afraid i have given cause to think i am needlessly prolix in handling this subject. for, to what purpose is it to dilate on that which may be demonstrated with the utmost evidence in a line or two, to any one that is capable of the least reflexion? it is but looking into your own thoughts, and so trying whether you can conceive it possible for a sound, or figure, or motion, or colour to exist without the mind or unperceived. this easy trial may perhaps make you see that what you contend for is a downright contradiction. insomuch that i am content to put the whole upon this issue: if you can but conceive it possible for one extended movable substance, or, in general, for any one idea, or anything like an idea, to exist otherwise than in a mind perceiving it, i shall readily give up the cause. and, as for all that compages of external bodies you contend for, i shall grant you its existence, though 1. you cannot either give me any reason why you believe it exists, or 2. assign any use to it when it is supposed to exist. i say, the bare possibility of your opinions being true shall pass for an argument that it is so.
i am afraid i have given you cause to think me needlessly long-winded in handling this subject. for what is the point of hammering away at something that can be proved in a line or two, convincing anyone who is capable of the least reflection? look into your own thoughts, and try to conceive it possible for a sound or shape or motion or colour to exist outside the mind, or unperceived. can you do it? this simple thought-experiment may make you see that what you have been defending is a downright contradiction. i am willing to stake my whole position on this: if you can so much as conceive it possible for one extended movable substance or in general for any one idea or anything like an idea to exist otherwise than in a mind perceiving it, i shall cheerfully give up my opposition to matter; and as for all that great apparatus of external bodies that you argue for, i shall admit its existence, even though you cannot either give me any reason why you believe it exists, or assign any use to it when it is supposed to exist. i repeat: the bare possibility of your being right will count as an argument that you are right.

but, say you, surely there is nothing easier than for me to imagine trees, for instance, in a park, or books existing in a closet, and nobody by to perceive them. i answer, you may so, there is no difficulty in it; but what is all this, i beseech you, more than framing in your mind certain ideas which you call books and trees, and the same time omitting to frame the idea of any one that may perceive them? but do not you yourself perceive or think of them all the while? this therefore is nothing to the purpose; it only shows you have the power of imagining or forming ideas in your mind: but it does not show that you can conceive it possible the objects of your thought may exist without the mind. to make out this, it is necessary that you conceive them existing unconceived or unthought of, which is a manifest repugnancy. when we do our utmost to conceive the existence of external bodies, we are all the while only contemplating our own ideas. but the mind taking no notice of itself, is deluded to think it can and does conceive bodies existing unthought of or without the mind, though at the same time they are apprehended by or exist in itself. a little attention will discover to any one the truth and evidence of what is here said, and make it unnecessary to insist on any other proofs against the existence of material substance.
but, you say, surely there is nothing easier than to imagine trees in a park, for instance, or books on a shelf, with nobody there to perceive them. i reply that this is indeed easy to imagine; but let us look into what happens when you imagine it. you form in your mind certain ideas that you call books and trees, and at the same time you omit to form the idea of anyone who might perceive them. but while you are doing this, you perceive or think of them! so your thought- experiment misses the point; it shows only that you have the power of imagining or forming ideas in your mind; but it doesn't show that you can conceive it possible for the objects of your thought to exist outside the mind. to show that, you would have to conceive them existing unconceived or unthought-of, which is an obvious contradiction. however hard we try to conceive the existence of external bodies, all we achieve is to contemplate our own ideas. the mind is misled into thinking that it can and does conceive bodies existing outside the mind or unthought-of because it pays no attention to itself, and so doesn't notice that it contains or thinks of the things that it conceives. think about it a little and you will see that what i am saying is plainly true; there is really no need for any of the other disproofs of the existence of material substance.

the absolute existence of unthinking things are words without a meaning. it is very obvious, upon the least inquiry into our thoughts, to know whether it is possible for us to understand what is meant by the absolute existence of sensible objects in themselves, or without the mind. to me it is evident those words mark out either a direct contradiction, or else nothing at all. and to convince others of this, i know no readier or fairer way than to entreat they would calmly attend to their own thoughts; and if by this attention the emptiness or repugnancy of those expressions does appear, surely nothing more is requisite for the conviction. it is on this therefore that i insist, to wit, that the absolute existence of unthinking things are words without a meaning, or which include a contradiction. this is what i repeat and inculcate, and earnestly recommend to the attentive thoughts of the reader.
it takes very little enquiry into our own thoughts to know for sure whether we can understand what is meant by the absolute existence of perceptible objects outside the mind. to me it is clear that those words mark out either a direct contradiction or else nothing at all. to convince you of this, i know no easier or fairer way than to urge you to attend calmly to your own thoughts: if that attention reveals to you the emptiness or inconsistency of those words, that is surely all you need to be convinced. so that is what i insist on: the phrase the absolute existence of unthinking things has either no meaning or a self-contradictory one. this is what i repeat and teach, and urge you to think about carefully.

third argument. refutation of locke. all our ideas, sensations, notions, or the things which we perceive, by whatsoever names they may be distinguished, are visibly inactive there is nothing of power or agency included in them. so that one idea or object of thought cannot produce or make any alteration in another. to be satisfied of the truth of this, there is nothing else requisite but a bare observation of our ideas. for, since they and every part of them exist only in the mind, it follows that there is nothing in them but what is perceived: but whoever shall attend to his ideas, whether of sense or reflexion, will not perceive in them any power or activity; there is, therefore, no such thing contained in them. a little attention will discover to us that the very being of an idea implies passiveness and inertness in it, insomuch that it is impossible for an idea to do anything, or, strictly speaking, to be the cause of anything: neither can it be the resemblance or pattern of any active being, as is evident from sect. 8. whence it plainly follows that extension, figure, and motion cannot be the cause of our sensations. to say, therefore, that these are the effects of powers resulting from the configuration, number, motion, and size of corpuscles, must certainly be false.
all our ideas sensations, things we perceive, call them what you will are visibly inactive; there is no power or agency in them. one idea or object of thought, therefore, cannot produce or affect another. to be convinced of this we need only to attend to our ideas. they are wholly contained within the mind, so whatever is in them must be perceived. now, if you attend to your ideas, whether of sense or reflection, you will not perceive any power or activity in them; so there is no power or activity in them. think about it a little and you'll realize that passiveness and inertness are of the essence of an idea, so that an idea can't do anything or be the cause strictly speaking of anything; nor can it resemble anything that is active, as is evident from 8. from this it clearly follows that extension, shape and motion can't be the cause of our sensations. so it must be false to say that our sensations result from powers that things have because of the arrangement, number, motion, and size of the corpuscles in them.

cause of ideas. we perceive a continual succession of ideas, some are anew excited, others are changed or totally disappear. there is therefore some cause of these ideas, whereon they depend, and which produces and changes them. that this cause cannot be any quality or idea or combination of ideas, is clear from the preceding section. it must therefore be a substance; but it has been shown that there is no corporeal or material substance: it remains therefore that the cause of ideas is an incorporeal active substance or spirit.
we perceive a continual stream of ideas: new ones appear, others are changed or totally disappear. these ideas must have a cause something they depend on, something that produces and changes them. it is clear from 25 that this cause cannot be any quality or idea or combination of ideas, because that section shows that ideas are inactive, i.e. have no causal powers; and thus qualities have no powers either, because qualities are ideas. so the cause must be a substance, because reality consists of nothing but substances and their qualities. it cannot be a corporeal or material substance, because i have shown that there is no such thing. we must therefore conclude that the cause of ideas is an incorporeal active substance a spirit.

no idea of spirit. a spirit is one simple, undivided, active being as it perceives ideas it is called the understanding, and as it produces or otherwise operates about them it is called the will. hence there can be no idea formed of a soul or spirit; for all ideas whatever, being passive and inert vide sect. 25, they cannot represent unto us, by way of image or likeness, that which acts. a little attention will make it plain to any one, that to have an idea which shall be like that active principle of motion and change of ideas is absolutely impossible. such is the nature of spirit, or that which acts, that it cannot be of itself perceived, but only by the effects which it produceth. if any man shall doubt of the truth of what is here delivered, let him but reflect and try if he can frame the idea of any power or active being, and whether he has ideas of two principal powers, marked by the names will and understanding, distinct from each other as well as from a third idea of substance or being in general, with a relative notion of its supporting or being the subject of the aforesaid powers which is signified by the name soul or spirit. this is what some hold; but, so far as i can see, the words will, soul, spirit, do not stand for different ideas, or, in truth, for any idea at all, but for something which is very different from ideas, and which, being an agent, cannot be like unto, or represented by, any idea whatsoever. though it must be owned at the same time that we have some notion of soul, spirit, and the operations of the mind: such as willing, loving, hating inasmuch as we know or understand the meaning of these words.
a spirit is an active being. it is simple, in the sense that it doesn't have parts. when thought of as something that perceives ideas, it is called the understanding, and when thought of as producing ideas or doing things with them, it is called the will. but understanding and will are different powers that a spirit has; they aren't parts of it. it follows that no-one can form an idea of a soul or spirit. we have seen in 25 that all ideas are passive and inert, and therefore no idea can represent an active thing, which is what a spirit is, because no idea can resemble an active thing. if you think about it a little, you'll see clearly that it is absolutely impossible to have an idea that is like an active cause of the change of ideas. the nature of spirit i.e. that which acts is such that it cannot itself be perceived; all we can do is to perceive the effects it produces. to perceive a spirit would be to have an idea of it, that is, an idea that resembles it; and i have shown that no idea can resemble a spirit because ideas are passive and spirits active. if you think i may be wrong about this, you should look in on yourself and try to form the idea of a power or of an active being, that is, a thing that has power. to do this, you need to have ideas of two principal powers called will and understanding, these ideas being distinct from each other and from a third idea of substance or being in general, which is called soul or spirit; and you must also have a relative notion of spirit's supporting or being the subject of those two powers. some people say that they have all that; but it seems to me that the words will and spirit don't stand for distinct ideas, or indeed for any idea at all, but for something very different from ideas. because this something is an agent, it cannot resemble or be represented by any idea whatsoever. though it must be admitted that we have some notion of soul, spirit, and operations of the mind such as willing, loving and hating, in that we understand the meanings of those words.

i find i can excite ideas in my mind at pleasure, and vary and shift the scene as oft as i think fit. it is no more than willing, and straightway this or that idea arises in my fancy; and by the same power it is obliterated and makes way for another. this making and unmaking of ideas doth very properly denominate the mind active. thus much is certain and grounded on experience; but when we think of unthinking agents or of exciting ideas exclusive of volition, we only amuse ourselves with words.
i find i can arouse ideas in my mind at will, and vary and shift the mental scene whenever i want to. i need only to will, and straight away this or that idea arises in my mind; and by willing again i can obliterate it and bring on another. it is because the mind makes and unmakes ideas in this way that it can properly be called active. it certainly is active; we know this from experience. but anyone who talks of unthinking agents or of arousing ideas without the use of volition is merely letting himself be led astray by words.

ideas of sensation differ from those of reflection or memory. but, whatever power i may have over my own thoughts, i find the ideas actually perceived by sense have not a like dependence on my will. when in broad daylight i open my eyes, it is not in my power to choose whether i shall see or no, or to determine what particular objects shall present themselves to my view; and so likewise as to the hearing and other senses; the ideas imprinted on them are not creatures of my will. there is therefore some other will or spirit that produces them.
whatever power i may have over my own thoughts, however, i find that the ideas i get through my senses don't depend on my will in the same way. when in broad daylight i open my eyes, it isn't in my power to choose whether or not i shall see anything, or to choose what particular objects i shall see; and the same holds for hearing and the other senses. my will is not responsible for the ideas that come to me through any of my senses. so there must be some other will some other spirit that produces them.

laws of nature. the ideas of sense are more strong, lively, and distinct than those of the imagination; they have likewise a steadiness, order, and coherence, and are not excited at random, as those which are the effects of human wills often are, but in a regular train or series, the admirable connexion whereof sufficiently testifies the wisdom and benevolence of its author. now the set rules or established methods wherein the mind we depend on excites in us the ideas of sense, are called the laws of nature; and these we learn by experience, which teaches us that such and such ideas are attended with such and such other ideas, in the ordinary course of things.
the ideas of sense are stronger, livelier, and clearer than those of the imagination; and they are also steady, orderly and coherent. ideas that people bring into their own minds at will are often random and jumbled, but the ideas of sense aren't like that: they come in a regular series, and are inter-related in admirable ways that show us the wisdom and benevolence of the series author. the phrase the laws of nature names the set rules or established methods whereby the mind we depend on that is, god arouses in us the ideas of sense. we learn what they are by experience, which teaches us that such and such ideas are ordinarily accompanied or followed by such and such others.

knowledge of them necessary for the conduct of worldly affairs. this gives us a sort of foresight which enables us to regulate our actions for the benefit of life. and without this we should be eternally at a loss; we could not know how to act anything that might procure us the least pleasure, or remove the least pain of sense. that food nourishes, sleep refreshes, and fire warms us; that to sow in the seed-time is the way to reap in the harvest; and in general that to obtain such or such ends, such or such means are conducive all this we know, not by discovering any necessary connexion between our ideas, but only by the observation of the settled laws of nature, without which we should be all in uncertainty and confusion, and a grown man no more know how to manage himself in the affairs of life than an infant just born.
this gives us a sort of foresight that enables us to regulate our actions for the benefit of life. without this we would always be at a loss: we couldn't know how to do anything to bring ourselves pleasure or spare ourselves pain. that food nourishes, sleep refreshes, and fire warms us; that to sow in the spring is the way to get a harvest in the fall, and in general that such and such means are the way to achieve such and such ends we know all this not by discovering any necessary connection between our ideas but only by observing the settled laws of nature. without them we would be utterly uncertain and confused, and a grown man would have no more idea than a new-born infant does of how to manage himself in the affairs of life.

and yet this consistent uniform working, which so evidently displays the goodness and wisdom of that governing spirit whose will constitutes the laws of nature, is so far from leading our thoughts to him, that it rather sends them a wandering after second causes. for, when we perceive certain ideas of sense constantly followed by other ideas and we know this is not of our own doing, we forthwith attribute power and agency to the ideas themselves, and make one the cause of another, than which nothing can be more absurd and unintelligible. thus, for example, having observed that when we perceive by sight a certain round luminous figure we at the same time perceive by touch the idea or sensation called heat, we do from thence conclude the sun to be the cause of heat. and in like manner perceiving the motion and collision of bodies to be attended with sound, we are inclined to think the latter the effect of the former.
this consistent, uniform working obviously displays the goodness and wisdom of god, the governing spirit whose will constitutes the laws of nature. and yet, far from leading our thoughts towards him, it sends them away from him in a wandering search for second causes that is, for causes that come between god and the effects we want to explain. for when we perceive that certain ideas of sense are constantly followed by other ideas, and we know that this isn't our doing, we immediately attribute power and agency to the ideas themselves, and make one the cause of another than which nothing can be more absurd and unintelligible. thus, for example, having observed that when we perceive by sight a certain round luminous figure, we at the same time perceive by touch the idea or sensation called heat, we infer that the sun causes heat. similarly, when we perceive that a collision of bodies is accompanied by sound, we are inclined to think the latter an effect of the former.

of real things and ideas or chimeras. the ideas imprinted on the senses by the author of nature are called real things; and those excited in the imagination being less regular, vivid, and constant, are more properly termed ideas, or images of things, which they copy and represent. but then our sensations, be they never so vivid and distinct, are nevertheless ideas, that is, they exist in the mind, or are perceived by it, as truly as the ideas of its own framing. the ideas of sense are allowed to have more reality in them, that is, to be more 1strong, 2orderly, and 3coherent than the creatures of the mind; but this is no argument that they exist without the mind. they are also 4less dependent on the spirit, or thinking substance which perceives them, in that they are excited by the will of another and more powerful spirit; yet still they are ideas, and certainly no idea, whether faint or strong, can exist otherwise than in a mind perceiving it.
the 1 ideas imprinted on the senses by the author of nature are called real things; and those 2 that are caused by the imagination, being less regular, vivid, and constant, are more properly called ideas or images of things that they copy and represent. but our 1 sensations, however vivid and distinct they may be, are nevertheless ideas; that is, they exist in the mind, or are perceived by it, as truly as 2 the ideas that mind itself makes. the 1 ideas of sense are agreed to have more reality in them i.e. to be more strong, orderly, and coherent than ideas made by the mind; but this doesn't show that they exist outside the mind. they are also less dependent on the spirit or thinking substance that perceives them, for they are caused by the will of another and more powerful spirit, namely god; but still they are ideas, and certainly no idea whether faint or strong can exist otherwise than in a mind perceiving it.

first general objection. answer. before we proceed any farther it is necessary we spend some time in answering objections which may probably be made against the principles we have hitherto laid down. in doing of which, if i seem too prolix to those of quick apprehensions, i hope it may be pardoned, since all men do not equally apprehend things of this nature, and i am willing to be understood by every one.
before we move on, i have to spend some time in answering objections that are likely to be made against the principles i have laid down. i shall answer twelve of them, ending in 72; and further objections will occupy 73-84. my answer to the first of the twelve will run to the end of 40. if fast-thinking readers find me too long-winded about this, i hope they will pardon me. my excuse is that people aren't all equally quick in getting a grasp on topics such as this, and i want to be understood by everyone. first, then, this will be objected:

first, then, it will be objected that by the foregoing principles all that is real and substantial in nature is banished out of the world, and instead thereof a chimerical scheme of ideas takes place. all things that exist, exist only in the mind, that is, they are purely notional. what therefore becomes of the sun, moon and stars? what must we think of houses, rivers, mountains, trees, stones; nay, even of our own bodies? are all these but so many chimeras and illusions on the fancy? to all which, and whatever else of the same sort may be objected, i answer, that by the principles premised we are not deprived of any one thing in nature. whatever we see, feel, hear, or anywise conceive or understand remains as secure as ever, and is as real as ever. there is a rerum natura, and the distinction between realities and chimeras retains its full force. this is evident from sect. 29, 30, and 33, where we have shown what is meant by real things in opposition to chimeras or ideas of our own framing; but then they both equally exist in the mind, and in that sense they are alike ideas.
by your principles everything real and substantial in nature is banished out of the world, and replaced by a chimerical system of ideas. all things that exist do so only in the mind according to you, that is, they are purely notional. then what becomes of the sun, moon, and stars? what must we think of houses, rivers, mountains, trees, stones even of our own bodies, for that matter? are all these mere illusions, creatures of the imagination? to all this and any other objections of the same sort i answer that the principles i have laid down don't deprive us of any one thing in nature. whatever we see, feel, hear, or in any way conceive or understand remains as secure as ever, and is as real as ever. there is a real world, and the distinction between realities and chimeras retains its full force. this is evident from 29-30 and 33, where i have shown what is meant by real things in opposition to chimeras or ideas made by us; but by that account real things and chimeras both exist in the mind, and in that sense are alike in being ideas.

the existence of matter, as understood by philosophers, denied. i do not argue against the existence of any one thing that we can apprehend either by sense or reflexion. that the things i see with my eyes and touch with my hands do exist, really exist, i make not the least question. the only thing whose existence we deny is that which philosophers call matter or corporeal substance. and in doing of this there is no damage done to the rest of mankind, who, i dare say, will never miss it. the atheist indeed will want the colour of an empty name to support his impiety; and the philosophers may possibly find they have lost a great handle for trifling and disputation.
i don't argue against the existence of any one thing that we can take in, either by sense or reflection. i don't in the least question that the things i see with my eyes and touch with my hands do exist, really exist. the only thing whose existence i deny is what philosophers call matter or corporeal substance. and in denying this i do no harm to the rest of mankind that is, to people other than philosophers because they will never miss it. the atheist indeed will lose the rhetorical help he gets from an empty name, matter, which he uses to support his impiety; and the philosophers may find that they have lost a great opportunity for wordspinning and disputation.

readily explained. if any man thinks this detracts from the existence or reality of things, he is very far from understanding what has been premised in the plainest terms i could think of. take here an abstract of what has been said: there are spiritual substances, minds, or human souls, which will or excite ideas in themselves at pleasure; but these are faint, weak, and unsteady in respect of others they perceive by sense which, being impressed upon them according to certain rules or laws of nature, speak themselves the effects of a mind more powerful and wise than human spirits. these latter are said to have more reality in them than the former: by which is meant that they are more affecting, orderly, and distinct, and that they are not fictions of the mind perceiving them. and in this sense the sun that i see by day is the real sun, and that which i imagine by night is the idea of the former. in the sense here given of reality it is evident that every vegetable, star, mineral, and in general each part of the mundane system, is as much a real being by our principles as by any other. whether others mean anything by the term reality different from what i do, i entreat them to look into their own thoughts and see.
if you think that this detracts from the existence or reality of things, you are very far from understanding what i have said in the plainest way i could think of. here it is again, in brief outline. there are spiritual substances, minds, or human souls, which cause ideas in themselves through acts of the will, doing this as they please; but these ideas are faint, weak, and unsteady as compared with other ideas that minds perceive by sense. the latter ideas, being impressed on minds according to certain rules or laws of nature tell us that they are the effects of a mind that is stronger and wiser than human spirits. the latter are said to have more reality in them than the former: by which is meant that they are more forceful, orderly, and distinct, and that they aren't fictions of the mind that perceives them. in this sense, the sun that i see by day is the real sun, and what i imagine by night is the idea of the former. in the sense i am here giving to reality, it is evident that every plant, star, rock, and in general each part of the system of the world, is as much a real thing by my principles as by any others. whether you mean by reality anything different from what i do, i beg you to look into your own thoughts and see.

the philosophic, not the vulgar substance, taken away. i will be urged that thus much at least is true, to wit, that we take away all corporeal substances. to this my answer is, that if the word substance be taken in the vulgar sense for a combination of sensible qualities, such as extension, solidity, weight, and the like this we cannot be accused of taking away: but if it be taken in a philosophic sense for the support of accidents or qualities without the mind then indeed i acknowledge that we take it away, if one may be said to take away that which never had any existence, not even in the imagination.
you will want to object: at least it is true that you take away all corporeal substances. i answer that if the word substance is taken in the ordinary everyday sense standing for a combination of perceptible qualities such as extension, solidity, weight, etc. i cannot be accused of taking substance away. but if substance is taken in a philosophic sense standing for the support of qualities outside the mind then indeed i agree that i take it away, if one may be said to take away something that never had any existence, not even in the imagination.

but, say you, it sounds very harsh to say we eat and drink ideas, and are clothed with ideas. i acknowledge it does so the word idea not being used in common discourse to signify the several combinations of sensible qualities which are called things; and it is certain that any expression which varies from the familiar use of language will seem harsh and ridiculous. but this doth not concern the truth of the proposition, which in other words is no more than to say, we are fed and clothed with those things which we perceive immediately by our senses. the hardness or softness, the colour, taste, warmth, figure, or suchlike qualities, which combined together constitute the several sorts of victuals and apparel, have been shown to exist only in the mind that perceives them; and this is all that is meant by calling them ideas; which word if it was as ordinarily used as thing, would sound no harsher nor more ridiculous than it. i am not for disputing about the propriety, but the truth of the expression. if therefore you agree with me that we eat and drink and are clad with the immediate objects of sense, which cannot exist unperceived or without the mind, i shall readily grant it is more proper or conformable to custom that they should be called things rather than ideas.
but, you say, it sounds weird to say that we eat and drink ideas, and are clothed with them. so it does, because the word idea isn't used in ordinary talk to signify the combinations of perceptible qualities that are called things; and any expression that differs from the familiar use of language is bound to seem weird and ridiculous. but this doesn't concern the truth of the proposition, which in other words merely says that we are fed and clothed with things that we perceive immediately by our senses. the hardness or softness, the colour, taste, warmth, shape and such like qualities, which combine to constitute the various sorts of food and clothing, have been shown to exist only in the mind that perceives them; and this is all i mean by calling them ideas; which word, if it was as ordinarily used as thing, would sound no weirder or more ridiculous than thing does in the statement that we eat and drink things and are clothed with them. my concern isn't with the propriety of words but with the truth of my doctrine. so if you will agree with me that what we eat, drink, and clothe ourselves with are immediate objects of sense that cannot exist unperceived or outside the mind, i will readily agree with you that it is more proper more in line with ordinary speech to call them things rather than ideas.

the term idea preferable to thing. if it be demanded why i make use of the word idea, and do not rather in compliance with custom call them things. i answer, i do it for two reasons: first, because the term thing in contra-distinction to idea, is generally supposed to denote somewhat existing without the mind; secondly, because thing has a more comprehensive signification than idea, including spirit or thinking things as well as ideas. since therefore the objects of sense exist only in the mind, and are withal thoughtless and inactive, i chose to mark them by the word idea, which implies those properties.
why do i employ the word idea, rather than following ordinary speech and calling them things? for two reasons: first, because the term thing, unlike idea, is generally supposed to stand for something existing outside the mind; and secondly, because thing has a broader meaning than idea, because it applies to spirits, or thinking things, as well as to ideas. since the objects of sense exist only in the mind, and also are unthinking and inactive which spirits are not, i choose to mark them by the word idea, which implies those properties.

the evidence of the senses not discredited. but, say what we can, some one perhaps may be apt to reply, he will still believe his senses, and never suffer any arguments, how plausible soever, to prevail over the certainty of them. be it so; assert the evidence of sense as high as you please, we are willing to do the same. that what i see, hear, and feel doth exist, that is to say, is perceived by me, i no more doubt than i do of my own being. but i do not see how the testimony of sense can be alleged as a proof for the existence of anything which is not perceived by sense. we are not for having any man turn sceptic and disbelieve his senses; on the contrary, we give them all the stress and assurance imaginable; nor are there any principles more opposite to scepticism than those we have laid down, as shall be hereafter clearly shown.
you may want to say: say what you like, i will still believe my senses, and will never allow any arguments, however plausible they may be, to prevail over the certainty of my senses. be it so, assert the obvious rightness of the senses as strongly as you please i shall do the same! what i see, hear, and feel exists i.e. is perceived by me and i don't doubt this any more than i doubt my own existence. but i don't see how the testimony of the senses can be brought as proof of the existence of anything that is not perceived by sense. i don't want anyone to become a sceptic, and to disbelieve his senses; on the contrary, i give the senses all the emphasis and assurance imaginable; and there are no principles more opposed to scepticism than those i have laid down, as will be clearly shown later on.

second objection. answer. secondly, it will be objected that there is a great difference betwixt real fire for instance, and the idea of fire, betwixt dreaming or imagining oneself burnt, and actually being so: if you suspect it to be only the idea of fire which you see, do but put your hand into it and you will be convinced with a witness. this and the like may be urged in opposition to our tenets. to all which the answer is evident from what has been already said; and i shall only add in this place, that if real fire be very different from the idea of fire, so also is the real pain that it occasions very different from the idea of the same pain, and yet nobody will pretend that real pain either is, or can possibly be, in an unperceiving thing, or without the mind, any more than its idea.
secondly, it will be objected that there is a great difference between for instance real fire and the idea of fire, between actually being burnt and dreaming or imagining oneself to be burnt. the answer to this and to all the similar objections that may be brought against my position is evident from what i have already said. at this point i shall add only this: if real fire is very different from the idea of fire, so also is the real pain that comes from it very different from the idea of that pain; but nobody will maintain that real pain could possibly exist in an unperceiving thing, or outside the mind, any more than the idea of it can.

third objection. answer. thirdly, it will be objected that we see things actually without or at distance from us, and which consequently do not exist in the mind; it being absurd that those things which are seen at the distance of several miles should be as near to us as our own thoughts. in answer to this, i desire it may be considered that in a dream we do oft perceive things as existing at a great distance off, and yet for all that, those things are acknowledged to have their existence only in the mind.
thirdly, it will be objected that we see things actually outside us, at a distance from us; and these things don't exist in the mind, for it would be absurd to suppose that things that are seen at the distance of several miles are as near to us as our own thoughts. in answer to this i ask you to considered the fact that in dreams we often perceive things as existing at a great distance off, and yet those things are acknowledged to exist only in the mind.

the ideas of sight and touch make two species entirely distinct and heterogeneous. the former are marks and prognostics of the latter. that the proper objects of sight neither exist without mind, nor are the images of external things, was shown even in that treatise. though throughout the same the contrary be supposed true of tangible objects not that to suppose that vulgar error was necessary for establishing the notion therein laid down, but because it was beside my purpose to examine and refute it in a discourse concerning vision. so that in strict truth the ideas of sight, when we apprehend by them distance and things placed at a distance, do not suggest or mark out to us things actually existing at a distance, but only admonish us what ideas of touch will be imprinted in our minds at such and such distances of time, and in consequence of such or such actions. it is, i say, evident from what has been said in the foregoing parts of this treatise, and in sect. 147 and elsewhere of the essay concerning vision, that visible ideas are the language whereby the governing spirit on whom we depend informs us what tangible ideas he is about to imprint upon us, in case we excite this or that motion in our own bodies. but for a fuller information in this point i refer to the essay itself.
the ideas of sight and of touch constitute two species, entirely distinct and different from one another. the former are marks and forward-looking signs of the latter. even in my new theory i showed though this wasn't its central purpose that the items that are perceived only by sight don't exist outside the mind and don't resemble external things. throughout that work i supposed that tangible objects ones that we feel do exist outside the mind. i didn't need that common error in order to establish the position i was developing in the book; but i let it stand because it was beside my purpose to examine and refute it in a treatment of vision. thus, the strict truth of the matter is this: when we see things at a distance from us, the ideas of sight through which we do this don't suggest or mark out to us things actually existing at a distance, but only warn us about what ideas of touch will be imprinted in our minds if we act in such and such ways for such and such a length of time. on the basis of what i have already said in the present work, and of 147 and other parts of the new theory, it is evident that visible ideas are the language in which the governing spirit on whom we depend god tells us what tangible ideas he is about to imprint on us if we bring about this or that movement of our own bodies. for a fuller treatment of this point, i refer you to the new theory itself.

fourth objection, from perpetual annihilation and creation. answer. fourthly, it will be objected that from the foregoing principles it follows things are every moment annihilated and created anew. the objects of sense exist only when they are perceived; the trees therefore are in the garden, or the chairs in the parlour, no longer than while there is somebody by to perceive them. upon shutting my eyes all the furniture in the room is reduced to nothing, and barely upon opening them it is again created. in answer to all which, i refer the reader to what has been said in sect. 3, 4, &c., and desire he will consider whether he means anything by the actual existence of an idea distinct from its being perceived. for my part, after the nicest inquiry i could make, i am not able to discover that anything else is meant by those words; and i once more entreat the reader to sound his own thoughts, and not suffer himself to be imposed on by words. if he can conceive it possible either for his ideas or their archetypes to exist without being perceived, then i give up the cause; but if he cannot, he will acknowledge it is unreasonable for him to stand up in defence of he knows not what, and pretend to charge on me as an absurdity the not assenting to those propositions which at bottom have no meaning in them.
fourthly, this will be objected: it follows from your principles that things are at every moment annihilated and created anew. the objects of sense according to you exist only when they are perceived; so the trees are in the garden and the chairs in the parlour only as long as there is somebody there to perceive them. when i shut my eyes all the furniture in the room is reduced to nothing, and merely from my opening them it is again created. in answer to all this, i ask you to look back at 3, 4, etc. and then ask yourself whether you mean by the actual existence of an idea anything but its being perceived. for my part, after the most carefully precise enquiry i could make, i cannot discover that i mean anything else by those words. i ask you again as i did in 25 intro to examine your own thoughts, and not to allow yourself to be imposed on by words. if you can conceive it to be possible for either your ideas or things of which they are copies to exist without being perceived, then i throw in my hand; but if you can't, you will admit that it is unreasonable for you to stand up in defence of you know not what, and claim to convict me of absurdity because i don't assent to propositions that at bottom have no meaning in them.

argumentum ad hominem. it will not be amiss to observe how far the received principles of philosophy are themselves chargeable with those pretended absurdities. 1 it is thought strangely absurd that upon closing my eyelids all the visible objects around me should be reduced to nothing; and yet is not this what philosophers commonly acknowledge, when they agree on all hands that light and colours, which alone are the proper and immediate objects of sight, are mere sensations that exist no longer than they are perceived? 2again, it may to some perhaps seem very incredible that things should be every moment creating, yet this very notion is commonly taught in the schools. for the schoolmen, though they acknowledge the existence of matter, and that the whole mundane fabric is framed out of it, are nevertheless of opinion that it cannot subsist without the divine conservation, which by them is expounded to be a continual creation.
it would be as well to think about how far the commonly accepted principles of philosophy are themselves guilty of those alleged absurdities. it is thought to be highly absurd that when i close my eyes all the visible objects around me should be reduced to nothing; but isn't this what philosophers commonly admit when they all agree that light and colours which are the only immediate objects of sight and only of sight are mere sensations, and exist only while they are perceived? again, some may find it quite incredible that things should be coming into existence at every moment; yet this very notion is commonly taught in the schools. for the schoolmen, though they acknowledge the existence of matter, and say that the whole world is made out of it, nevertheless hold that matter cannot go on existing without god's conserving it, which they understand to be his continually creating it.

3 further, a little thought will discover to us that though we allow the existence of matter or corporeal substance, yet it will unavoidably follow, from the principles which are now generally admitted, that the particular bodies, of what kind soever, do none of them exist whilst they are not perceived. for, it is evident from sect. ii and the following sections, that the matter philosophers contend for is an incomprehensible somewhat, which has none of those particular qualities whereby the bodies falling under our senses are distinguished one from another. 2 but, to make this more plain, it must be remarked that the infinite divisibility of matter is now universally allowed, at least by the most approved and considerable philosophers, who on the received principles demonstrate it beyond all exception. hence, it follows there is an infinite number of parts in each particle of matter which are not perceived by sense. the reason therefore that any particular body seems to be of a finite magnitude, or exhibits only a finite number of parts to sense, is, not because it contains no more, since in itself it contains an infinite number of parts, but because the sense is not acute enough to discern them. in proportion therefore as the sense is rendered more acute, it perceives a greater number of parts in the object, that is, the object appears greater, and its figure varies, those parts in its extremities which were before unperceivable appearing now to bound it in very different lines and angles from those perceived by an obtuser sense. and at length, after various changes of size and shape, when the sense becomes infinitely acute the body shall seem infinite. during all which there is no alteration in the body, but only in the sense. each body therefore, considered in itself, is infinitely extended, and consequently void of all shape or figure. from which it follows that, though we should grant the existence of matter to be never so certain, yet it is withal as certain, the materialists themselves are by their own principles forced to acknowledge, that neither the particular bodies perceived by sense, nor anything like them, exists without the mind. matter, i say, and each particle thereof, is according to them infinite and shapeless, and it is the mind that frames all that variety of bodies which compose the visible world, any one whereof does not exist longer than it is perceived.
furthermore, a little thought will show us that even if we do admit the existence of matter or corporeal substance, it will still follow from principles that are now generally accepted, that no particular bodies of any kind exist while they aren't perceived. for it is evident from 11 and the following sections that the matter philosophers stand up for is an incomprehensible something, having none of those particular qualities through which the bodies falling under our senses are distinguished one from another. to make this more plain, bear in mind that the infinite divisibility of matter is now accepted by all, or at least by the most approved and considerable philosophers, who have demonstrated it conclusively from principles that are generally accepted. now consider the following line of thought, starting from the premise of the infinite divisibility of matter. each particle of matter contains an infinite number of parts that aren't perceived by sense because they are too small. why, then, does any particular body seem to be of a finite magnitude, or exhibit only a finite number of parts to our senses? not because it has only finitely many parts, for it contains an infinite number of parts. rather, it is because our senses aren't acute enough to detect any more. therefore, in proportion as any of our senses becomes more acute, it will perceive more parts in the object; that is, the object will appear larger, and its shape will be different because parts near its outer edges ones that before were unperceivable will appear to give it a boundary whose lines and angles are very different from those perceived by the sense before it became sharper. if the sense in question became infinitely acute, the body would go through various changes of size and shape, and would eventually seem infinite. all this would happen with no alteration in the body, only a sharpening of the sense. each body, therefore, considered in itself, is infinitely extended and consequently has no shape. from this it follows that even if we grant that the existence of matter is utterly certain, it is equally certain as the materialists are forced by their own principles to admit that the particular bodies perceived through the senses don't exist outside the mind, nor does anything like them. according to them, each particle of matter is infinite and shapeless, and it is the mind that makes all that variety of bodies that compose the visible world, none of which exists any longer than it is perceived.

if we consider it, the objection proposed in sect. 45 will not be found reasonably charged on the principles we have premised, so as in truth to make any objection at all against our notions. for, though we hold indeed the objects of sense to be nothing else but ideas which cannot exist unperceived; yet we may not hence conclude they have no existence except only while they are perceived by us, since there may be some other spirit that perceives them though we do not. wherever bodies are said to have no existence without the mind, i would not be understood to mean this or that particular mind, but all minds whatsoever. it does not therefore follow from the foregoing principles that bodies are annihilated and created every moment, or exist not at all during the intervals between our perception of them.
when you think about it, the objection brought in 45 turns out not to provide reasonable support for any accusation against my views. i do indeed hold that the things we perceive are nothing but ideas that can't exist unperceived, but it doesn't follow that they have no existence except when they are perceived by us; for there may be some other spirit that perceives them when we don't. whenever i say that bodies have no existence outside the mind, i refer not to this or that particular mind but to all minds whatsoever. so it doesn't follow from my principles that bodies are annihilated and created every moment, or that they don't exist at all during the intervals between our perception of them.

fifth objection. answer. fifthly, it may perhaps be objected that if extension and figure exist only in the mind, it follows that the mind is extended and figured; since extension is a mode or attribute which to speak with the schools is predicated of the subject in which it exists. i answer, 1 those qualities are in the mind only as they are perceived by it that is, not by way of mode or attribute, but only by way of idea; and it no more follows the soul or mind is extended, because extension exists in it alone, than it does that it is red or blue, because those colours are on all hands acknowledged to exist in it, and nowhere else. 2 as to what philosophers say of subject and mode, that seems very groundless and unintelligible. for instance, in this proposition a die is hard, extended, and square, they will have it that the word die denotes a subject or substance, distinct from the hardness, extension, and figure which are predicated of it, and in which they exist. this i cannot comprehend: to me a die seems to be nothing distinct from those things which are termed its modes or accidents. and, to say a die is hard, extended, and square is not to attribute those qualities to a subject distinct from and supporting them, but only an explication of the meaning of the word die.
fifthly, it may be objected that if extension and shape exist only in the mind, it follows that the mind is extended and shaped, because extension is a quality or attribute that is predicated of the subject in which it exists. i answer that those qualities are in the mind only in that they are perceived by it that is, not as qualities or attributes of it but only as ideas that it has. it no more follows that the soul or mind is extended because extension exists only in it than it follows that the mind is red or blue because as everyone agrees those colours exist only in it. as to what philosophers say of subject and mode, that seems very groundless and unintelligible. for instance, in the proposition a die is hard, extended, and square they hold that the word die refers to a subject or substance that is distinct from the hardness, extension, and squareness that are predicated of it a subject in which those qualities exist. i cannot make sense of this. to me a die seems to be nothing over and above the things that are called its qualities. and to say that a die is hard, extended, and square isn't to attribute those qualities to a subject distinct from and supporting them, but only to explain the meaning of the word die.

sixth objection, from natural philosophy. answer. sixthly, you will say there have been a great many things explained by matter and motion; take away these and you destroy the whole corpuscular philosophy, and undermine those mechanical principles which have been applied with so much success to account for the phenomena. in short, whatever advances have been made, either by ancient or modern philosophers, in the study of nature do all proceed on the supposition that corporeal substance or matter doth really exist. to this i answer that there is not any one phenomenon explained on that supposition which may not as well be explained without it, as might easily be made appear by an induction of particulars. to explain the phenomena, is all one as to show why, upon such and such occasions, we are affected with such and such ideas. but 1 how matter should operate on a spirit, or produce any idea in it, is what no philosopher will pretend to explain; it is therefore evident there can be no use of matter in natural philosophy. besides, 2 they who attempt to account for things do it not by corporeal substance, but by figure, motion, and other qualities, which are in truth no more than mere ideas, and, therefore, cannot be the cause of anything, as has been already shown. see sect. 25.
sixthly, you will object like this: many things have been explained in terms of matter and motion. if you take away these you will destroy the whole corpuscular philosophy, and undermine those mechanical principles that have been applied with so much success to explain the phenomena. in short, whatever advances have been made in the study of nature by ancient scientists or by modern ones have all built on the supposition that corporeal substance or matter really exists. to this i answer that every single phenomenon that is explained on that supposition could just as well be explained without it, as i could easily show by going through them all one by one. instead of that, however, i shall do something that takes less time, namely show that the supposition of matter cannot explain any phenomenon. to explain the phenomena is simply to show why upon such and such occasions we are affected with such and such ideas. but how matter should operate on a mind, or produce any idea in it, is something that no philosopher or scientist will claim to explain. so, obviously, there can be no use for the concept of matter in natural science. besides, those who try explain things do it not by corporeal substance but by shape, motion and other qualities; these are merely ideas and therefore can't cause anything, as i have already shown. see 25.

seventh objection. answer. seventhly, it will upon this be demanded whether it does not seem absurd to take away natural causes, and ascribe everything to the immediate operation of spirits? we must no longer say upon these principles that fire heats, or water cools, but that a spirit heats, and so forth. would not a man be deservedly laughed at, who should talk after this manner? i answer, he would so; in such things we ought to think with the learned, and speak with the vulgar. they who to demonstration are convinced of the truth of the copernican system do nevertheless say the sun rises, the sun sets, or comes to the meridian; and if they affected a contrary style in common talk it would without doubt appear very ridiculous. a little reflexion on what is here said will make it manifest that the common use of language would receive no manner of alteration or disturbance from the admission of our tenets.
seventhly, from what i have said you will want to protest: it seems absurd to take away natural causes, and attribute everything to the immediate operation of spirits! according to your principles, we must no longer say that fire heats or water cools, but that a spirit heats, and so forth. if someone actually talked like that, wouldn't he be laughed at, and rightly so? yes, he would. in matters like this we ought to think with the learned and speak with the vulgar. there is nothing disreputable about this; learned people already do speak with the vulgar in many respects. people who are perfectly convinced of the truth of the copernican system in astronomy still say that the sun rises, the sun sets, the sun is high in the sky; and it would surely seem ridiculous to speak in any other way. think about this a little and you will see that the acceptance of my doctrines wouldn't even slightly disturb or alter the common use of language.

in the ordinary affairs of life, any phrases may be retained, so long as they excite in us proper sentiments, or dispositions to act in such a manner as is necessary for our well-being, how false soever they may be if taken in a strict and speculative sense. nay, this is unavoidable, since, propriety being regulated by custom, language is suited to the received opinions, which are not always the truest. hence it is impossible, even in the most rigid, philosophic reasonings, so far to alter the bent and genius of the tongue we speak, as never to give a handle for cavillers to pretend difficulties and inconsistencies. but, a fair and ingenuous reader will collect the sense from the scope and tenor and connexion of a discourse, making allowances for those inaccurate modes of speech which use has made inevitable.
in the ordinary affairs of life, we can go on using any turns of phrase even ones that are false when taken in a really strict sense so long as they arouse in us appropriate thoughts or feelings or dispositions to act in ways that are good for us. indeed, this is unavoidable, because the standards for proper speech are set by what is customary, so that language has to be shaped by commonly held opinions, which are not always the truest. so even in the strictest philosophic reasonings we cannot alter the outlines of the english language so completely that we never provide faultfinders with an opportunity to accuse us of difficulties and inconsistencies in what we say. but a fair and honest reader will gather what is meant by a discourse from its over-all tendency and from how its parts hang together, making allowances for those inaccurate turns of phrase that common use has made inevitable.

as to the opinion that there are no corporeal causes, this has been heretofore maintained by some of the schoolmen, as it is of late by others among the modern philosophers, who though they allow matter to exist, yet will have god alone to be the immediate efficient cause of all things. these men saw that amongst all the objects of sense there was none which had any power or activity included in it; and that by consequence this was likewise true of whatever bodies they supposed to exist without the mind, like unto the immediate objects of sense. but then, that they should suppose an innumerable multitude of created beings, which they acknowledge are not capable of producing any one effect in nature, and which therefore are made to no manner of purpose, since god might have done everything as well without them: this i say, though we should allow it possible, must yet be a very unaccountable and extravagant supposition.
as for the thesis that there are no corporeal causes that is, no bodies that have causal powers this used to be maintained by some of the schoolmen, and also more recently by some modern philosophers such as malebranche. those moderns did believe that matter exists, but they insisted that god alone is the immediate cause of everything. they saw that none of the objects of sense has any power or activity included in it, from which they inferred that the same holds for the bodies that they thought to exist outside the mind. yet they went on believing in such bodies! that is, they believed in a vast multitude of created things that were admittedly incapable of producing any effects in nature, so that there was no point in god's creating them since he could have done everything just as well without them. even if this were possible, it would still be a very puzzling and extravagant supposition.

eighth objection. twofold answer. in the eighth place, the universal concurrent assent of mankind may be thought by some an invincible argument in behalf of matter, or the existence of external things. must we suppose the whole world to be mistaken? and if so, what cause can be assigned of so widespread and predominant an error? i answer, first, that, upon a narrow inquiry, it will not perhaps be found so many as is imagined do really believe the existence of matter or things without the mind. strictly speaking, to believe that which involves a contradiction, or has no meaning in it, is impossible; and whether the foregoing expressions are not of that sort, i refer it to the impartial examination of the reader. in one sense, indeed, men may be said to believe that matter exists, that is, they act as if the immediate cause of their sensations, which affects them every moment, and is so nearly present to them, were some senseless unthinking being. but, that they should clearly apprehend any meaning marked by those words, and form thereof a settled speculative opinion, is what i am not able to conceive. this is not the only instance wherein men impose upon themselves, by imagining they believe those propositions which they have often heard, though at bottom they have no meaning in them.
in the eighth place, some may think that the existence of matter, or of external things, is shown by the fact that all mankind believe in it. must we suppose the whole world to be mistaken? the objection runs and if so, how can we explain such a wide-spread and predominant error? i answer, first, that when we look into it carefully we may find that the existence of matter or of things outside the mind is not really believed in by as many people as the objector imagines. strictly speaking, it is impossible to believe something that involves a contradiction, or has no meaning in it; and i invite you to consider impartially whether matter and things outside the mind aren't of that sort. in one sense indeed, men may be said to believe that matter exists: that is, they act as if the immediate cause of their sensations, which affects them every moment and is so nearly present to them, were some unsensing and unthinking being. but that they should clearly have any meaning for those words, and make out of them a settled theoretical opinion, is what i cannot conceive. this isn't the only case where men deceive themselves by imagining they believe propositions that they have often heard but basically have no meaning in them.

but secondly, though we should grant a notion to be never so universally and steadfastly adhered to, yet this is weak argument of its truth to whoever considers what a vast number of prejudices and false opinions are everywhere embraced with the utmost tenaciousness, by the unreflecting which are the far greater part of mankind. there was a time when the antipodes and motion of the earth were looked upon as monstrous absurdities even by men of learning: and if it be considered what a small proportion they bear to the rest of mankind, we shall find that at this day those notions have gained but a very inconsiderable footing in the world.
but in any case and this is my second reply, even if some proposition is firmly believed by nearly everyone, that is a weak argument for its truth to anyone who considers what a vast number of prejudices and false opinions are everywhere accepted with the utmost tenacity by unreflecting people i.e. by the great majority of people. there was a time when everyone, even learned men, regarded as monstrous absurdities the view that there are there are lands on the opposite side of the globe, and the view that the earth moves. the learned now know better, but when we consider what a small proportion of mankind they are, we can expect that even now those notions of the earth's moving and of there being lands on the far side of it are not widely accepted in the world.

ninth objection. answer. but it is demanded that we assign a cause of this prejudice, and account for its obtaining in the world. to this i answer, that men knowing they perceived several ideas, whereof they themselves were not the authors as not being excited from within nor depending on the operation of their wills this made them maintain those ideas, or objects of perception had an existence independent of and without the mind, without ever dreaming that a contradiction was involved in those words. but, philosophers having plainly seen that the immediate objects of perception do not exist without the mind, they in some degree corrected the mistake of the vulgar; but at the same time run into another which seems no less absurd, to wit, that there are certain objects really existing without the mind, or having a subsistence distinct from being perceived, of which our ideas are only images or resemblances, imprinted by those objects on the mind. and this notion of the philosophers owes its origin to the same cause with the former, namely, their being conscious that they were not the authors of their own sensations, which they evidently knew were imprinted from without, and which therefore must have some cause distinct from the minds on which they are imprinted.
but i am challenged to explain this prejudice that there is matter outside the mind, and to account for its popularity. i now do so. men became aware that they perceived various ideas of which they themselves were not the authors, because these ideas weren't caused from within, and didn't depend on the operation of their wills. this led them to think that those ideas those objects of perception had an existence independent of the mind and outside it; and it never entered their heads that a contradiction was involved in those words. but philosophers plainly saw that the immediate objects of perception don't exist outside the mind, and this led them to correct, up to a point, the mistake of the common man. in doing this, though, they ran into another mistake that seems equally absurd, namely: that certain objects really exist outside the mind, having an existence distinct from being perceived, and our ideas are only images or resemblances of these objects, imprinted by the objects on the mind. and this view of the philosophers has the same source as the common man's mistake: they realized that they weren't the authors of their own sensations, which they clearly knew were imprinted from outside and must therefore have some cause distinct from the minds on which they were imprinted.

but why they should suppose the ideas of sense to be excited in us by things in their likeness, and not rather have recourse to spirit which alone can act, may be accounted for, first, because they were not aware of the repugnancy there is, 1 as well in supposing things like unto our ideas existing without, as in 2 attributing to them power or activity. secondly, because the supreme spirit which excites those ideas in our minds, is not marked out and limited to our view by any particular finite collection of sensible ideas, as human agents are by their size, complexion, limbs, and motions. and thirdly, because his operations are regular and uniform. whenever the course of nature is interrupted by a miracle, men are ready to own the presence of a superior agent. but, when we see things go on in the ordinary course they do not excite in us any reflexion; their order and concatenation, though it be an argument of the greatest wisdom, power, and goodness in their creator, is yet so constant and familiar to us that we do not think them the immediate effects of a free spirit; especially since inconsistency and mutability in acting, though it be an imperfection, is looked on as a mark of freedom.
did they suppose that the ideas of sense are caused in us by things they resemble, rather than attributing them to the causal action of spirit, which is the only kind of thing that can act? for three reasons.. first, the philosophers weren't aware of the inconsistency of supposing that things like our ideas exist outside minds, and that things like our ideas have power or activity. second, the supreme spirit that causes those ideas in our minds isn't presented to us by any particular finite collection of perceptible ideas, in the way that human agents are marked out by their size, skin-colour, limbs, and motions. third, the supreme spirit's operations are regular and uniform. whenever the course of nature is interrupted by a miracle, men are ready to admit that a superior being is at work; but when we see the course of events continue in the ordinary way, we aren't prompted to reflect on this. although the order and interlinking of events is evidence for the greatest wisdom, power, and goodness in their creator, it is so constant and familiar to us that we don't think of the events as the immediate effects of a free spirit especially since inconstancy and changeability in acting, though really an imperfection, is looked on as a sign of freedom.

tenth objection. answer. tenthly, it will be objected that the notions we advance are inconsistent with several sound truths in philosophy and mathematics. for example, the motion of the earth is now universally admitted by astronomers as a truth grounded on the clearest and most convincing reasons. but, on the foregoing principles, there can be no such thing. for, motion being only an idea, it follows that if it be not perceived it exists not; but the motion of the earth is not perceived by sense. i answer, that tenet, if rightly understood, will be found to agree with the principles we have premised; for, the question whether the earth moves or no amounts in reality to no more than this, to wit, whether we have reason to conclude, from what has been observed by astronomers, that if we were placed in such and such circumstances, and such or such a position and distance both from the earth and sun, we should perceive the former to move among the choir of the planets, and appearing in all respects like one of them; and this, by the established rules of nature which we have no reason to mistrust, is reasonably collected from the phenomena.
tenthly, this will be objected: the views you advance are inconsistent with various sound truths in science and mathematics. for example, the motion of the earth is now universally accepted by astronomers as a truth grounded in the clearest and most convincing reasons; but on your principles there can be no such motion. for motion is only an idea; so it doesn't exist except as perceived; but the motion of the earth is not perceived by sense. i answer that the doctrine that the earth moves, if rightly understood, will be found to agree with my principles. the question does the earth move? amounts in reality to just this: do we have reason to conclude from what astronomers have observed that if we were placed in such and such circumstances, at such or such a position and distance both from the earth and sun, we would see the earth moving among the choir of the planets and appearing in all respects like one of them? the answer is yes. this is a conclusion we can reasonably draw from the phenomena through the established rules of nature, which we have no reason to mistrust.

we may, from the experience we have had of the train and succession of ideas in our minds, often make, i will not say uncertain conjectures, but sure and well grounded predictions concerning the ideas we shall be affected with pursuant to a great train of actions, and be enabled to pass a right judgment of what would have appeared to us, in case we were placed in circumstances very different from those we are in at present. herein consists the knowledge of nature, which may preserve its use and certainty very consistently with what has been said. it will be easy to apply this to whatever objections of the like sort may be drawn from the magnitude of the stars, or any other discoveries in astronomy or nature.
from the experience we have had of the order and succession of ideas in our minds, we can often make something better than uncertain conjectures indeed, sure and well-grounded predictions concerning the ideas we shall have if we do engage in this or that complex sequence of actions; and these predictions enable us to judge correctly what would have appeared to us if things had been in such and such specific ways very different from those we are in at present. that is what the knowledge of nature consists in an account that preserves the usefulness and certainty of such knowledge without conflicting with what i have said. it will be easy to re-apply this line of thought to any other objections of the same sort concerning the size of the stars or any other discoveries in astronomy or nature.

answer. to all which i answer, first, that though there were some difficulties relating to the administration of providence, and the uses by it assigned to the several parts of nature, which i could not solve by the foregoing principles, yet this objection could be of small weight against the truth and certainty of those things which may be proved a priori, with the utmost evidence and rigor of demonstration. secondly, but neither are the received principles free from the like difficulties; for, it may still be demanded to what end god should take those roundabout methods of effecting things by instruments and machines, which no one can deny might have been effected by the mere command of his will without all that apparatus; nay, if we narrowly consider it, we shall find the objection may be retorted with greater force on those who hold the existence of those machines without of mind; for it has been made evident that solidity, bulk, figure, motion, and the like have no activity or efficacy in them, so as to be capable of producing any one effect in nature. see sect. 25. whoever therefore supposes them to exist allowing the supposition possible when they are not perceived does it manifestly to no purpose; since the only use that is assigned to them, as they exist unperceived, is that they produce those perceivable effects which in truth cannot be ascribed to anything but spirit.
here are three preliminaries to my main answer to this. first, even if my principles do fail to solve some difficulties concerning how providence manages the world, and what uses it assigns to the various parts of nature, this objection couldn't carry much weight against the truth and certainty of those things that can be conclusively proved a priori. secondly, the commonly accepted principles suffer from similar difficulties; for we can challenge their adherents to explain why god should take those round-about methods of getting results by instruments and machines, when everyone knows that he could have achieved them by the mere command of his will, without all that apparatus. indeed thirdly, if we think about it hard we shall find that this objection tells with greater force against those who believe in those machines outside the mind; for it has been made evident that solidity, bulk, shape, motion and the like have no activity or efficacy in them, and so cannot produce any one effect in nature. see 25. so anyone who supposes them to exist allowing the supposition to be possible when they aren't perceived does this obviously to no purpose; for the only use that is assigned to them, as they exist unperceived, is to produce those perceivable effects that can't in truth be ascribed to anything but spirit.

fourthly. but, to come nigher the difficulty, it must be observed that though the fabrication of all those parts and organs be not absolutely necessary to the producing any effect, yet it is necessary to the producing of things in a constant regular way according to the laws of nature. there are certain general laws that run through the whole chain of natural effects; these are learned by the observation and study of nature, and are by men applied as well to the framing artificial things for the use and ornament of life as to the explaining various phenomena which explication consists only in showing the conformity any particular phenomenon has to the general laws of nature, or, which is the same thing, in discovering the uniformity there is in the production of natural effects; as will be evident to whoever shall attend to the several instances wherein philosophers pretend to account for appearances. that there is a great and conspicuous use in these regular constant methods of working observed by the supreme agent has been shown in sect. 31. and it is no less visible that a particular size, figure, motion, and disposition of parts are necessary, though not absolutely to the producing any effect, yet to the producing it according to the standing mechanical laws of nature. thus, for instance, it cannot be denied that god, or the intelligence that sustains and rules the ordinary course of things, might if he were minded to produce a miracle, cause all the motions on the dial-plate of a watch, though nobody had ever made the movements and put them in it: but yet, if he will act agreeably to the rules of mechanism, by him for wise ends established and maintained in the creation, it is necessary that those actions of the watchmaker, whereby he makes the movements and rightly adjusts them, precede the production of the aforesaid motions; as also that any disorder in them be attended with the perception of some corresponding disorder in the movements, which being once corrected all is right again.
but to come nearer to the difficulty, it must be observed that though the making of all those parts and organs isn't absolutely necessary for producing any effect, it is necessary for producing things in a constant, regular way according to the laws of nature. there are certain general laws that run through the whole chain of natural effects; we learn these by the observation and study of nature, and apply them in making artificial things for the use and ornament of life, as well as in explaining the various phenomena. such an explanation consists only in showing how a particular phenomenon conforms to the general laws of nature, or the same thing in revealing the uniformity that there is in the production of natural effects. you can see this if you attend to particular explanations that scientists have offered for phenomena. i showed in 31 that the supreme agent's regular constant methods of working have a great and obvious usefulness to us. and it is no less obvious that a particular size, shape, motion, and structure, though not absolutely necessary for any effect, are necessary for the effect to be produced according to the standing mechanical laws of nature. thus, for instance, it can't be denied that god the intelligence that sustains and rules the ordinary course of things could produce a miracle if he wanted to, causing all the movements on the dial of a watch without anyone's supplying it with a working mechanism; but if he is to act in conformity with the rules of mechanism, established and maintained by him for wise ends, it is necessary that those actions of the watchmaker in which he makes and then adjusts the machinery precede the movements of the hands on the dial; and also that any disorder in those movement be accompanied by the perception of some corresponding disorder in the machinery, the correction of which cures the disorder.

it may indeed on some occasions be necessary that the author of nature display his overruling power in producing some appearance out of the ordinary series of things. such exceptions from the general rules of nature are proper to surprise and awe men into an acknowledgement of the divine being; but then they are to be used but seldom, otherwise there is a plain reason why they should fail of that effect. besides, god seems to choose the convincing our reason of his attributes by the works of nature, which discover so much harmony and contrivance in their make, and are such plain indications of wisdom and beneficence in their author, rather than to astonish us into a belief of his being by anomalous and surprising events.
it may indeed sometimes be necessary that the author of nature display his overruling power in producing some appearance that doesn't fit his ordinary pattern of events. such exceptions from the general rules of nature are just what's needed to surprise and awe men into an acknowledgment of the divine being; but then they aren't to be used often, for if they were they would fail to have that effect. besides, god seems to prefer convincing our reason about what he is like through the works of nature, which reveal so much harmony and ingenuity in their structure and are such plain indications of wisdom and good-will in their author, to astonishing us by anomalous and surprising events into believing that he exists.

to set this matter in a yet clearer light, i shall observe that what has been objected in sect. 60 amounts in reality to no more than this: ideas are not anyhow and at random produced, there being a certain order and connexion between them, like to that of cause and effect; there are also several combinations of them made in a very regular and artificial manner, which seem like so many instruments in the hand of nature that, being hid as it were behind the scenes, have a secret operation in producing those appearances which are seen on the theatre of the world, being themselves discernible only to the curious eye of the philosopher. but, since one idea cannot be the cause of another, to what purpose is that connexion? and, since those instruments, being barely inefficacious perceptions in the mind, are not subservient to the production of natural effects, it is demanded why they are made; or, in other words, what reason can be assigned why god should make us, upon a close inspection into his works, behold so great variety of ideas so artfully laid together, and so much according to rule; it not being credible that he would be at the expense if one may so speak of all that art and regularity to no purpose.
the objection brought in 60 really amounts only to the following. ideas aren't produced anyhow and at random; there is a certain order and connection amongst them, like the order of causes and effects; and they come in various combinations that are put together in a very regular manner as though by design. these combinations seem like instruments in the hand of nature. hidden behind the scenes, so to speak, they secretly operate in producing the appearances that are seen on the world's stage, though they themselves are detected only by the scientist who looks for them. but since one idea can't cause another, what is the purpose of this order and connection? since those instruments in the hand of nature are mere powerless perceptions in the mind, and so can't help in the production of natural effects, i am being asked why they exist at all. that is to ask why it is that when we closely inspect god's works he causes us to observe such a great variety of ideas, inter-related in ways that are so regular and look so much like the result of a designer's skill. it isn't credible that he would to no purpose put himself to the expense so to speak of all that skillful design and regularity.

to all which my answer is, first, that the connexion of ideas does not imply the relation of cause and effect, but only of a mark or sign with the thing signified. the fire which i see is not the cause of the pain i suffer upon my approaching it, but the mark that forewarns me of it. in like manner the noise that i hear is not the effect of this or that motion or collision of the ambient bodies, but the sign thereof. secondly, the reason why ideas are formed into machines, that is, artificial and regular combinations, is the same with that for combining letters into words. that a few original ideas may be made to signify a great number of effects and actions, it is necessary they be variously combined together. and, to the end their use be permanent and universal, these combinations must be made by rule, and with wise contrivance. by this means abundance of information is conveyed unto us, concerning what we are to expect from such and such actions and what methods are proper to be taken for the exciting such and such ideas; which in effect is all that i conceive to be distinctly meant when it is said that, by discerning a figure, texture, and mechanism of the inward parts of bodies, whether natural or artificial, we may attain to know the several uses and properties depending thereon, or the nature of the thing.
my answer to all this has two parts. first, the connection of ideas doesn't imply the relation of cause and effect, but only of a mark or sign with the thing signified. the fire i see is not the cause of the pain i suffer when i come too close, but a sign that warns me of that pain. similarly, the noise that i hear is not an effect of a collision of nearby bodies, but a sign of it. secondly, the reason why ideas are formed into machines, i.e. regular combinations that manifest a designer's skill, is the same as the reason why letters are combined into words. if a few basic ideas are to signify a great number of effects and actions, there must be different ways of combining them; if these combinations are to be usable by everyone, they must be contrived wisely so that they can carry vast amounts of information yet still be understood by us; and if they are to be always available and helpful, they must be governed by rules that don't change from time to time. in this way we are given a great deal of information about what to expect from such and such actions, and how to go about arousing such and such ideas. and really that is all that is clearly meant when people say that by finding out the shape, texture, and structure of the inner parts of bodies, whether natural or artificial, we can discover what the thing is really like and how it can be used.

proper employment of the natural philosopher. hence, it is evident that those things which, under the notion of a cause co-operating or concurring to the production of effects, are altogether inexplicable, and run us into great absurdities, may be very naturally explained, and have a proper and obvious use assigned to them, when they are considered only as marks or signs for our information. and it is the searching after and endeavouring to understand those signs instituted by the author of nature, that ought to be the employment of the natural philosopher; and not the pretending to explain things by corporeal causes, which doctrine seems to have too much estranged the minds of men from that active principle, that supreme and wise spirit in whom we live, move, and have our being.
hence it is evident that things that are the wholly inexplicable source of great absurdities when they are regarded as causes that help to produce effects can be very naturally explained, and have a proper and obvious use assigned them when they are considered only as marks or signs for our information. what the scientist ought to be doing is to detect and decipher those signs this language, so to speak instituted by the author of nature, not claiming to explain things in terms of corporeal causes a claim that seems to have too much estranged the minds of men from god, that active principle, that supreme and wise spirit, in whom we live, move, and have our being.

twelfth objection. answer. in the twelfth place, it may perhaps be objected that though it be clear from what has been said that there can be no such thing as an inert, senseless, extended, solid, figured, movable substance existing without the mind, such as philosophers describe matter yet, if any man shall leave out of his idea of matter the positive ideas of extension, figure, solidity and motion, and say that he means only by that word an inert, senseless substance, that exists without the mind or unperceived, which is the occasion of our ideas, or at the presence whereof god is pleased to excite ideas in us: it doth not appear but that matter taken in this sense may possibly exist. in answer to which i say, first, that it seems no less absurd to suppose a substance without accidents, than it is to suppose accidents without a substance. but secondly, though we should grant this unknown substance may possibly exist, yet where can it be supposed to be? that it exists not in the mind is agreed; and that it exists not in place is no less certain since all place or extension exists only in the mind, as has been already proved. it remains therefore that it exists nowhere at all.
in the twelfth place, this may be objected: it is clear from what you have said that there can be no such thing as an inert, senseless, extended, solid, shaped, movable substance existing outside the mind, which is how philosophers describe matter. but suppose someone leaves out of his idea of matter the positive ideas of extension, shape, solidity, and motion, and says that all he means by that word is an inert senseless substance that exists outside the mind or unperceive and is the occasion of our ideas, meaning by occasion that god is pleased to cause ideas in us when matter is present. there seems to be no reason why matter in this sense of the word should not exist. in answer to this i say first that it seems no less absurd to suppose a substance without qualities than it is to suppose qualities without a substance. anyway, secondly, if this unknown substance exists where does it do so? we agree that it doesn't exist in the mind; and it is equally certain that it doesn't exist in some place, for all place or extension exists only in the mind, as i have already proved. so it exists nowhere at all!

matter supports nothing, an argument against its existence. let us examine a little the description that is here given us of matter. it neither acts, nor perceives, nor is perceived; for this is all that is meant by saying it is an inert, senseless, unknown substance; which is a definition entirely made up of negatives, excepting only the relative notion of its standing under or supporting. but then it must be observed that it supports nothing at all, and how nearly this comes to the description of a nonentity i desire may be considered. but, say you, it is the unknown occasion, at the presence of which ideas are excited in us by the will of god. now, i would fain know how anything can be present to us, which is neither perceivable by sense nor reflexion, nor capable of producing any idea in our minds, nor is at all extended, nor has any form, nor exists in any place. the words to be present, when thus applied, must needs be taken in some abstract and strange meaning, and which i am not able to comprehend.
let us examine a little the description of matter that is given to us here. it neither acts, nor perceives, nor is perceived, for that is all it means to say that it is an inert, senseless, unknown substance which is a definition entirely made up of negatives except for the relative notion of its standing under or supporting, but notice that it supports no qualities, and therefore supports nothing at al, so that it comes as close as you like to being the description of a nonentity. but, you say, it is the unknown occasion at the presence of which ideas are caused in us by the will of god. i would like to know how anything can be present to us if it isn't perceivable by sense or reflection, isn't capable of producing any idea in our minds, isn't at all extended, has no form, and exists in no place! the words to be present, as used here, have to be taken in some abstract and strange meaning that i cannot grasp.

again, let us examine what is meant by occasion. so far as i can gather from the common use of language, that word signifies either the agent which produces any effect, or else something that is observed to accompany or go before it in the ordinary course of things. but when it is applied to matter as above described, it can be taken in neither of those senses; for matter is said to be passive and inert, and so cannot be an agent or efficient cause. it is also unperceivable, as being devoid of all sensible qualities, and so cannot be the occasion of our perceptions in the latter sense: as when the burning my finger is said to be the occasion of the pain that attends it. what therefore can be meant by calling matter an occasion? the term is either used in no sense at all, or else in some very distant from its received signification.
again, let us examine what is meant by occasion. so far as i can gather from the common use of language, that word signifies either the agent that produces some effect, or something that is observed to accompany or go before a kind of event in the ordinary course of things. but when it is applied to matter as described in 67, the word occasion cannot be taken in either of those senses. for matter is said to be passive and inert, and so it cannot be an agent or cause. it is also unperceivable, because devoid of all perceptible qualities, and so it cannot be the occasion of our perceptions in the latter sense as when burning my finger is said to be the occasion of the pain that goes with it. so what can be meant by calling matter an occasion? this term is used either with no meaning or with some meaning very distant from its commonly accepted one.

you will perhaps say that matter, though it be not perceived by us, is nevertheless perceived by god, to whom it is the occasion of exciting ideas in our minds. for, say you, since we observe our sensations to be imprinted in an orderly and constant manner, it is but reasonable to suppose there are certain constant and regular occasions of their being produced. that is to say, that there are certain permanent and distinct parcels of matter, corresponding to our ideas, which, though they do not excite them in our minds, or anywise immediately affect us, as being altogether passive and unperceivable to us, they are nevertheless to god, by whom they art perceived, as it were so many occasions to remind him when and what ideas to imprint on our minds; that so things may go on in a constant uniform manner.
perhaps you will say this: although matter is not perceived by us, it is perceived by god, and to him it is the occasion of causing ideas in our minds. we do observe that our sensations are imprinted on our minds in an orderly and constant manner, which makes it reasonable for us to suppose there are certain constant and regular occasions of their being produced. that is, there are certain permanent and distinct portions of matter corresponding to our ideas; they don't cause the ideas in our minds or any other way immediately affect us, because they are altogether passive and unperceivable by us; but god can and does perceive them, and lets them serve as occasions to remind him when and what ideas to imprint on our minds, so that things may go on in a constant, uniform manner.

in answer to this, i observe that, as the notion of matter is here stated, the question is no longer concerning the existence of a thing distinct from spirit and idea, from perceiving and being perceived; but whether there are not certain ideas of i know not what sort, in the mind of god which are so many marks or notes that direct him how to produce sensations in our minds in a constant and regular method much after the same manner as a musician is directed by the notes of music to produce that harmonious train and composition of sound which is called a tune, though they who hear the music do not perceive the notes, and may be entirely ignorant of them. but, this notion of matter seems too extravagant to deserve a confutation. besides, it is in effect no objection against what we have advanced, viz. that there is no senseless unperceived substance.
in answer to this, i remark that on this account of matter we are no longer discussing the existence of a thing distinct from spirit and idea, from perceiving and being perceived. for matter is now being said to be perceived by god, and so our concern now is with the question of whether there are certain ideas of i know not what sort in the mind of god that are marks or notes that direct him how to produce sensations in our minds in a constant and regular method in much the way that the notes of music in a score direct a musician to produce a tune, though the listeners don't perceive the written notes and may be entirely ignorant of them. but this notion of matter seems too extravagant to deserve a refutation. and anyway it doesn't count against what i have been defending, namely the thesis that there is no senseless unperceived substance.

the order of our perceptions shows the goodness of god, but affords no proof of the existence of matter. if we follow the light of reason, we shall, from the constant uniform method of our sensations, collect the goodness and wisdom of the spirit who excites them in our minds; but this is all that i can see reasonably concluded from thence. to me, i say, it is evident that the being of a spirit infinitely wise, good, and powerful is abundantly sufficient to explain all the appearances of nature. but, as for inert, senseless matter, nothing that i perceive has any the least connexion with it, or leads to the thoughts of it. and i would fain see any one explain any the meanest phenomenon in nature by it, or show any manner of reason, though in the lowest rank of probability, that he can have for its existence, or even make any tolerable sense or meaning of that supposition. for, as to its being an occasion, we have, i think, evidently shown that with regard to us it is no occasion. it remains therefore that it must be, if at all, the occasion to god of exciting ideas in us; and what this amounts to we have just now seen.
the constant, uniform way that our sensations run will, if we follow the light of reason, lead us to infer the goodness and wisdom of the spirit who causes them in our minds. but i cannot see anything else that we can reasonably infer. to me, i say, it is obvious that the existence of an infinitely wise, good, and powerful spirit is quite enough to explain all the appearances of nature. as for inert, senseless matter: nothing that i perceive has the slightest connection with it, or leads to the thoughts of it. i challenge anyone to use it to explain any natural phenomenon, however small, or show any sort of reason, even one yielding only a very low probability, that he has for believing in its existence, or even provide a tolerable sense or meaning for that supposition. the last point isn't met by saying that matter is at least an occasion. for, as to its being an occasion, i think i have shown plainly that with regard to us it is no occasion; so if it is an occasion to anyone it must be to god his occasion for causing ideas in us and we have just seen what this amounts to.

it is worth while to reflect a little on the motives which induced men to suppose the existence of material substance; that so having observed the gradual ceasing and expiration of those motives or reasons, we may proportionably withdraw the assent that was grounded on them. first, therefore, it was thought that colour, figure, motion, and the rest of the sensible qualities or accidents, did really exist without the mind; and for this reason it seemed needful to suppose some unthinking substratum or substance wherein they did exist, since they could not be conceived to exist by themselves. afterwards, in process of time, men being convinced that colours, sounds, and the rest of the sensible, secondary qualities had no existence without the mind, they stripped this substratum or material substance of those qualities, leaving only the primary ones, figure, motion, and suchlike, which they still conceived to exist without the mind, and consequently to stand in need of a material support. but, it having been shown that none even of these can possibly exist otherwise than in a spirit or mind which perceives them it follows that we have no longer any reason to suppose the being of matter; nay, that it is utterly impossible there should be any such thing, so long as that word is taken to denote an unthinking substratum of qualities or accidents wherein they exist without the mind.
it is worthwhile to reflect a little on the motives that induced men to suppose the existence of material substance. as we watch those motives or reasons gradually weaken and die, we can correspondingly weaken the assent that was based on them. first, it was thought that colour, shape, motion, and the other perceptible qualities really do exist outside the mind; and this led them to think they needed to suppose some unthinking substratum or substance in which the qualities exist, since they couldn't be conceived to exist by themselves. secondly, some time later men became convinced that colours, sounds, and the rest of the perceptible secondary qualities have no existence outside the mind; so they stripped those qualities off this substratum or material substance, leaving only the primary ones, shape, motion, and such like, which they still conceived to exist outside the mind and consequently to need a material support. but i have shown that none even of the primary qualities can possibly exist otherwise than in a spirit or mind that perceives them, so we are left with no remaining reason to suppose the existence of matter. indeed it is utterly impossible that any such thing should exist, so long as matter is taken to stand for an unthinking substratum of qualities, in which they exist outside the mind.

but though it be allowed by the materialists themselves that matter was thought of only for the sake of supporting accidents, and, the reason entirely ceasing, one might expect the mind should naturally, and without any reluctance at all, quit the belief of what was solely grounded thereon; yet the prejudice is riveted so deeply in our thoughts, that we can scarce tell how to part with it, and are therefore inclined, since the thing itself is indefensible, at least to retain the name, which we apply to i know not what abstracted and indefinite notions of being, or occasion, though without any show of reason, at least so far as i can see. for, what is there on our part, or what do we perceive, amongst all the ideas, sensations, notions which are imprinted on our minds, either by sense or reflexion, from whence may be inferred the existence of an inert, thoughtless, unperceived occasion? and, on the other hand, on the part of an all-sufficient spirit, what can there be that should make us believe or even suspect he is directed by an inert occasion to excite ideas in our minds?
the materialists themselves conceded that matter was thought of only as a support for qualities. with that reason having collapsed, one might expect that the mind would naturally and without reluctance give up the belief that was based on it alone. yet the prejudice is riveted so deeply in our thoughts that we can hardly tell how to part with it, and this inclines us, since the thing itself is indefensible, at least to retain the name, which we use to convey i know not what abstracted and indefinite notions of being or occasion, though without any show of reason, at least so far as i can see. looking at it from our side: what do we perceive among all the ideas, sensations and notions that are imprinted on our minds by sense or reflection from which we can infer the existence of an inert, thoughtless, unperceived occasion? looking at it from the side of god, the all-sufficient spirit: why should we believe or even suspect that he is directed by an inert occasion to cause ideas in our minds?

absurdity of contending for the existence of matter as the occasion of ideas. it is a very extraordinary instance of the force of prejudice, and much to be lamented, that the mind of man retains so great a fondness, against all the evidence of reason, for a stupid thoughtless somewhat, by the interposition whereof it would as it were screen itself from the providence of god, and remove it farther off from the affairs of the world. but, though we do the utmost we can to secure the belief of matter, though, when reason forsakes us, we endeavour to support our opinion on the bare possibility of the thing, and though we indulge ourselves in the full scope of an imagination not regulated by reason to make out that poor possibility, yet the upshot of all is, that there are certain unknown ideas in the mind of god; for this, if anything, is all that i conceive to be meant by occasion with regard to god. and this at the bottom is no longer contending for the thing, but for the name.
we have here a very extraordinary and lamentable example of the force of prejudice. against all the evidence of reason, people remain devoted to a stupid, thoughtless something that they insert in such a way as to screen themselves off, so to speak, from the providence of god, and move him further away from the affairs of the world. but even if they do all they can to secure the belief in matter, even if when reason forsakes them they try to support their opinion by the bare possibility of the thing, and even if they defend that poor possibility by an uninhibited use of imagination with no guidance from reason still the most they get out of this is that there are certain unknown ideas in the mind of god; for this is what is meant if indeed anything is meant by occasion with regard to god. and this, at the bottom line, is no longer contending for the thing but only for the name.

whether therefore there are such ideas in the mind of god, and whether they may be called by the name matter, i shall not dispute. but, if you stick to the notion of an unthinking substance or support of extension, motion, and other sensible qualities, then to me it is most evidently impossible there should be any such thing, since it is a plain repugnancy that those qualities should exist in or be supported by an unperceiving substance.
i shan't argue about whether there are such ideas in the mind of god, and whether they may be called matter. but if you stick to the notion of an unthinking substance, or support of extension, motion, and other perceptible qualities, then to me it is most evidently impossible there should be any such thing, because it is a plain contradiction that those qualities should exist in or be supported by an unperceiving substance.

that a substratum not perceived, may exist, unimportant. but, say you, though it be granted that there is no thoughtless support of extension and the other qualities or accidents which we perceive, yet there may perhaps be some inert, unperceiving substance or substratum of some other qualities, as incomprehensible to us as colours are to a man born blind, because we have not a sense adapted to them. but, if we had a new sense, we should possibly no more doubt of their existence than a blind man made to see does of the existence of light and colours. i answer, first, if what you mean by the word matter be only the unknown support of unknown qualities, it is no matter whether there is such a thing or no, since it no way concerns us; and i do not see the advantage there is in disputing about what we know not what, and we know not why.
you may say this: still, granting that there is no thoughtless support of extension and of the other qualities we perceive, perhaps there's an inert unperceiving substance or substratum of some other qualities that are as incomprehensible to us as colours are to a man born blind, because we don't have a sense adapted to them. if we had a new sense, perhaps we would no more doubt of their existence than a blind man doubts the existence of light and colours when he regains his sight. i answer first that if what you mean by matter is only the unknown support of unknown qualities, it doesn't matter whether there is such a thing, since it no way concerns us; and i don't see what good it will do us to dispute about we know not what, and we know not why.

but, secondly, if we had a new sense it could only furnish us with new ideas or sensations; and then we should have the same reason against their existing in an unperceiving substance that has been already offered with relation to figure, motion, colour and the like. qualities, as has been shown, are nothing else but sensations or ideas, which exist only in a mind perceiving them; and this is true not only of the ideas we are acquainted with at present, but likewise of all possible ideas whatsoever.
but secondly, if we had a new sense it could only provide us with new ideas or sensations; and then we would have the same reason against their existing in an unperceiving substance that i have already offered with relation to shape, motion, colour, and the like. qualities, as i have shown, are nothing but sensations or ideas, which exist only in a mind perceiving them; and this is true not only of the ideas we are acquainted with at present but likewise of all possible ideas whatsoever.

but, you will insist, what if i have no reason to believe the existence of matter? what if i cannot assign any use to it or explain anything by it, or even conceive what is meant by that word? yet still it is no contradiction to say that matter exists, and that this matter is in general a substance, or occasion of ideas; though indeed to go about to unfold the meaning or adhere to any particular explication of those words may be attended with great difficulties. i answer, when words are used without a meaning, you may put them together as you please without danger of running into a contradiction. you may say, for example, that twice two is equal to seven, so long as you declare you do not take the words of that proposition in their usual acceptation but for marks of you know not what. and, by the same reason, you may say there is an inert thoughtless substance without accidents which is the occasion of our ideas. and we shall understand just as much by one proposition as the other.
you will insist: what if i have no reason to believe in the existence of matter? what if i can't find any use for it, or explain anything by it, or even conceive what is meant by that word? it is still not a contradiction to say matter exists, and it is in general a substance, or occasion of ideas; though admittedly there may be great difficulties in unfolding the meaning of those words, or standing by any particular account of what they mean. i answer that when words are used without a meaning you may put them together as you please without danger of running into a contradiction. you may say, for example, that twice two is equal to seven, so long as you declare that you don't intend those words in their usual meanings, but for marks of you know not what. and by the same reason you may say there is an inert thoughtless substance without qualities, which is the occasion of our ideas. we shall understand just as much by one proposition as by the other.

in the last place, you will say, what if we give up the cause of material substance, and stand to it that matter is an unknown somewhat neither substance nor accident, spirit nor idea, inert, thoughtless, indivisible, immovable, unextended, existing in no place. for, say you, whatever may be urged against substance or occasion, or any other positive or relative notion of matter, has no place at all, so long as this negative definition of matter is adhered to. i answer, you may, if so it shall seem good, use the word matter in the same sense as other men use nothing, and so make those terms convertible in your style. for, after all, this is what appears to me to be the result of that definition, the parts whereof when i consider with attention, either collectively or separate from each other, i do not find that there is any kind of effect or impression made on my mind different from what is excited by the term nothing.
in the last place, you will say: what if we give up the cause of material substance, and say only that matter is an unknown something, neither substance nor quality, neither spirit nor idea, inert, thoughtless, indivisible, immovable, unextended, existing in no place? whatever arguments may be brought against substance or occasion, or any other positive notion of matter, are of no effect so long as this negative definition of matter is kept to. i answer that you may, if you see fit, use matter in the same sense that other men use nothing, thus making those terms equivalent. for, after all, this is what appears to me to be the result of that definition: when i attentively consider its parts, either all together or one at a time, i don't find there is any kind of effect or impression made on my mind different from what is caused by the term nothing.

you will reply, perhaps, that in the fore-said definition is included what doth sufficiently distinguish it from nothing the positive abstract idea of quiddity, entity, or existence. i own, indeed, that those who pretend to the faculty of framing abstract general ideas do talk as if they had such an idea, which is, say they, the most abstract and general notion of all; that is, to me, the most incomprehensible of all others. that there are a great variety of spirits of different orders and capacities, whose faculties both in number and extent are far exceeding those the author of my being has bestowed on me, i see no reason to deny. and for me to pretend to determine by my own few, stinted narrow inlets of perception, what ideas the inexhaustible power of the supreme spirit may imprint upon them were certainly the utmost folly and presumption since there may be, for aught that i know, innumerable sorts of ideas or sensations, as different from one another, and from all that i have perceived, as colours are from sounds. but, how ready soever i may be to acknowledge the scantiness of my comprehension with regard to the endless variety of spirits and ideas that may possibly exist, yet for any one to pretend to a notion of entity or existence, abstracted from spirit and idea, from perceived and being perceived, is, i suspect, a downright repugnancy and trifling with words. it remains that we consider the objections which may possibly be made on the part of religion.
you may reply that this definition includes something that sufficiently distinguishes it from nothing, namely the positive, abstract idea of quiddity, entity, or existence. i admit that those who claim to be able to form abstract general ideas do talk as if they had such an idea; they call it the most abstract and general notion of all, while i call it the most incomprehensible. i see no reason to deny that there is a great variety of spirits, of different orders and capacities, whose abilities are far greater and more numerous than those the author of my being has bestowed on me. and for me to claim, on the basis of my own few, niggardly, narrow inlets of perception, what ideas the inexhaustible power of the supreme spirit may imprint on them would certainly be the utmost folly and presumption. for all i know, there may be innumerable sorts of ideas or sensations that differ from one another, and from any that i have perceived, as much as colours differ from sounds. but however ready i am to acknowledge how little i grasp of the endless variety of spirits and ideas that might possibly exist, when someone claims to have a notion of entity or existence abstracted from spirit and idea, from perceiving and being perceived i suspect him of a downright inconsistency and of trifling with words. and now we should consider the objections that may be made on religious grounds.

objections derived from the scriptures answered. some there are who think that, though the arguments for the real existence of bodies which are drawn from reason be allowed not to amount to demonstration, yet the holy scriptures are so clear in the point as will sufficiently convince every good christian that bodies do really exist, and are something more than mere ideas; there being in holy writ innumerable facts related which evidently suppose the reality of timber and stone, mountains and rivers, and cities, and human bodies. to which i answer that no sort of writings whatever, sacred or profane, which use those and the like words in the vulgar acceptation, or so as to have a meaning in them, are in danger of having their truth called in question by our doctrine. that all those things do really exist, that there are bodies, even corporeal substances, when taken in the vulgar sense, has been shown to be agreeable to our principles; and the difference betwixt things and ideas, realities and chimeras, has been distinctly explained. see sect. 29, 30, 33, 36, &c. and i do not think that either what philosophers call matter, or the existence of objects without the mind, is anywhere mentioned in scripture.
some people think this: although the arguments for the real existence of bodies that are drawn from reason don't amount to demonstrations, yet the holy scriptures are so clear about this that they will sufficiently convince every good christian that bodies do really exist and are something more than mere ideas. the scriptures relate innumerable facts that obviously involve the reality of timber, stone, mountains, rivers, cities, and human bodies. i answer that any writing at all, religious or secular, which uses timber, stone and such words in their common meanings, or so as to have some meaning, runs no risk of having its truth called into question by my doctrine. that all those things really exist, that there are bodies and even corporeal substances when this phrase is taken in its ordinarylanguage sense has been shown to be agreeable to my principles: and the difference between things and ideas, realities and chimeras, has been clearly explained. i don't think that either what philosophers call matter, or the existence of objects outside the mind, is mentioned anywhere in scripture.

no objection as to language tenable. again, whether there can be or be not external things, it is agreed on all hands that the proper use of words is the marking our conceptions, or things only as they are known and perceived by us; whence it plainly follows that in the tenets we have laid down there is nothing inconsistent with the right use and significancy of language, and that discourse, of what kind soever, so far as it is intelligible, remains undisturbed. but all this seems so manifest, from what has been largely set forth in the premises, that it is needless to insist any farther on it.
whether or not there are external things, everyone agrees that the proper use of words is in signalling our conceptions, or things only as they are known and perceived by us; and from this it plainly follows that in the doctrines i have laid down there is nothing inconsistent with the correct meaningful use of language, and that discourse of any kind whatsoever, as long as it is intelligible, remains undisturbed. but all this seems so obvious from what i have already said that there is no need for me to go on about it. but this will be urged:

but, secondly it will be urged that miracles do, at least, lose much of their stress and import by our principles. what must we think of moses rod? was it not really turned into a serpent; or was there only a change of ideas in the minds of the spectators? and, can it be supposed that our saviour did no more at the marriage-feast in cana than impose on the sight, and smell, and taste of the guests, so as to create in them the appearance or idea only of wine? the same may be said of all other miracles; which, in consequence of the foregoing principles, must be looked upon only as so many cheats, or illusions of fancy. to this i reply, that the rod was changed into a real serpent, and the water into real wine. that this does not in the least contradict what i have elsewhere said will be evident from sect. 34 and 35. but this business of real and imaginary has been already so plainly and fully explained, and so often referred to, and the difficulties about it are so easily answered from what has gone before, that it were an affront to the reader's understanding to resume the explication of it in its place. i shall only observe that if at table all who were present should see, and smell, and taste, and drink wine, and find the effects of it, with me there could be no doubt of its reality; so that at bottom the scruple concerning real miracles has no place at all on ours, but only on the received principles, and consequently makes rather for than against what has been said.
miracles, at least, become much less striking and important on your principles. what must we think of moses rod? rather than its really being turned into a serpent, was there only a change of ideas in the minds of the spectators? are we to suppose that all our saviour did at the marriage-feast in cana was to influence the sight, smell, and taste of the guests in such a way as to create in them the appearance or mere idea of wine? the same may be said of all other miracles. on your principles they must all be regarded as merely cheats, or illusions of the imagination. to this i reply that the rod was changed into a real serpent, and the water into real wine. that this doesn't in the least contradict what i have elsewhere said will be evident from 34-5. but this business of real and imaginary has been already so plainly and fully explained, and so often referred to, and the difficulties about it are so easily answered by what i have already said, that it would be an insult to your understanding to explain it all over again here. i shall only observe that if at table all who were present could see, smell, taste and drink wine, and feel the effects of it, that leaves me with no doubt as to its reality. so that in the final analysis the worry about real miracles isn't raised by my principles but is raised by the received principles, so that it counts for rather than against my position.

consequences of the preceding tenets. having done with the objections, which i endeavoured to propose in the clearest light, and gave them all the force and weight i could, we proceed in the next place to take a view of our tenets in their consequences. some of these appear at first sight as that several difficult and obscure questions, on which abundance of speculation has been thrown away, are entirely banished from philosophy. whether corporeal substance can think, whether matter be infinitely divisible, and how it operates on spirit these and like inquiries have given infinite amusement to philosophers in all ages; but depending on the existence of matter, they have no longer any place on our principles. many other advantages there are, as well with regard to religion as the sciences, which it is easy for any one to deduce from what has been premised; but this will appear more plainly in the sequel.
i have finished with the objections announced in 34, which i tried to present as clearly and with as much force and weight as i could. my next task is to consider the consequences of my principles. some of these come to the surface immediately, for example that several difficult and obscure questions on which much speculation has been wasted, are on my principles entirely banished from philosophy. can corporeal substance think? is matter infinitely divisible? how does matter act on spirit? these and similar questions have endlessly led philosophers astray in all ages; but because they depend on the existence of matter they don't arise on my principles. many other advantages, concerning religion as well as the sciences, can easily be deduced from what i have laid down. but this will appear more plainly in what follows from here to the end of the work.

the removal of matter gives certainty to knowledge. from the principles we have laid down it follows human knowledge may naturally be reduced to two heads that of ideas and that of spirits. of each of these i shall treat in order. and first as to ideas or unthinking things. our knowledge of these has been very much obscured and confounded, and we have been led into very dangerous errors, by supposing a twofold existence of the objects of sense the one intelligible or in the mind, the other real and without the mind; whereby unthinking things are thought to have a natural subsistence of their own distinct from being perceived by spirits. this, which, if i mistake not, has been shown to be a most groundless and absurd notion, is the very root of scepticism; for, so long as men thought that real things subsisted without the mind, and that their knowledge was only so far forth real as it was conformable to real things, it follows they could not be certain they had any real knowledge at all. for how can it be known that the things which are perceived are conformable to those which are not perceived, or exist without the mind?
from the principles i have laid down, it follows that human knowledge can naturally be classified under two headings knowledge of ideas, and of spirits. i shall take these separately. first, as to ideas or unthinking things, our knowledge of these has been very much obscured and confused, and we have been led into very dangerous errors, by supposing a two-fold existence of the objects of sense, one intelligible, or in the mind, the other real and outside the mind. the latter has been thought to give unthinking things a natural existence of their own, distinct from being perceived by spirits. this, which i think i have shown to be a most groundless and absurd notion, is the very root of scepticism: as long as men thought that real things existed outside the mind, and that their knowledge was real only to the extent that it conformed to real things, it followed that they couldn't be certain that they had any real knowledge at all. for how can it be known that the things that are perceived conform to those that aren't perceived, i.e. that exist outside the mind?

colour, figure, motion, extension, and the like, considered only as so many sensations in the mind, are perfectly known, there being nothing in them which is not perceived. but, if they are looked on as notes or images, referred to things or archetypes existing without the mind, then are we involved all in scepticism. we see only the appearances, and not the real qualities of things. what may be the extension, figure, or motion of anything really and absolutely, or in itself, it is impossible for us to know, but only the proportion or relation they bear to our senses. things remaining the same, our ideas vary, and which of them, or even whether any of them at all, represent the true quality really existing in the thing, it is out of our reach to determine. so that, for aught we know, all we see, hear, and feel may be only phantom and vain chimera, and not at all agree with the real things existing in rerum natura. all this scepticism follows from our supposing a difference between things and ideas, and that the former have a subsistence without the mind or unperceived. it were easy to dilate on this subject, and show how the arguments urged by sceptics in all ages depend on the supposition of external objects.
colour, shape, motion, extension, and the like, considered only as so many sensations in the mind, are perfectly known, because there is nothing in them that isn't perceived. but if they are looked on as signs or images that are meant to copy things existing outside the mind, then we are all involved in scepticism through a line of thought that goes like this: we see only the appearances of things, not their real qualities. we can't possibly know what a thing's size, shape or motion is, really and absolutely, in itself; all we can know is how its size etc. relate to our senses. our ideas can vary while things remain the same, and which of our ideas whether indeed any of them represent the true quality really existing in the thing is something we have no way to discover. for all we know, everything that we see, hear, and feel may be only phantom and empty chimera, and not at all agree with the real things existing in the real world. all this scepticism follows from supposing a difference between things and ideas, and that the former exist outside the mind, or unperceived. it would be easy to expand on this topic and show how the arguments advanced by sceptics in all ages depend on the supposition of external objects.

if there be external matter, neither the nature nor existence of things can be known. so long as we attribute a real existence to unthinking things, distinct from their being perceived, it is not only impossible for us to know with evidence the nature of any real unthinking being, but even that it exists. hence it is that we see philosophers distrust their senses, and doubt of the existence of heaven and earth, of everything they see or feel, even of their own bodies. and, after all their labour and struggle of thought, they are forced to own we cannot attain to any self-evident or demonstrative knowledge of the existence of sensible things. but, all this doubtfulness, which so bewilders and confounds the mind and makes philosophy ridiculous in the eyes of the world, vanishes if we annex a meaning to our words, and not amuse ourselves with the terms absolute, external, exist, and such-like, signifying we know not what. i can as well doubt of my own being as of the being of those things which i actually perceive by sense; it being a manifest contradiction that any sensible object should be immediately perceived by sight or touch, and at the same time have no existence in nature, since the very existence of an unthinking being consists in being perceived.
so long as we credit unthinking things with having a real existence distinct from their being perceived, we can't possibly know for sure what the nature is of any real unthinking being, or even that it exists. and so we see philosophers distrust their senses, and doubt the existence of heaven and earth, of everything they see or feel, even of their own bodies. and after all their labour and struggle of thought, they are forced to admit that we cannot get any self-evident or conclusively proved knowledge of the existence of perceptible things. but all this doubtfulness, which so bewilders and confuses the mind and makes philosophy ridiculous in the eyes of the world, vanishes if we give our words meanings, and don't distract ourselves with the terms absolute, external, exist, and such like, signifying we know not what. i can as well doubt my own existence as the existence of things that i actually perceive by sense. for it is an obvious contradiction to suppose that any perceptible object should be immediately perceived by sight or touch and at the same time have no existence in nature, because the very existence of an unthinking being consists in being perceived.

of thing or being. nothing seems of more importance towards erecting a firm system of sound and real knowledge, which may be proof against the assaults of scepticism, than to lay the beginning in a distinct explication of what is meant by thing, reality, existence; for in vain shall we dispute concerning the real existence of things, or pretend to any knowledge thereof, so long as we have not fixed the meaning of those words. thing or being is the most general name of all; it comprehends under it two kinds entirely distinct and heterogeneous, and which have nothing common but the name. viz. spirits and ideas. the former are active, indivisible substances: the latter are inert, fleeting, dependent beings, which subsist not by themselves, but are supported by, or exist in minds or spiritual substances. we comprehend our own existence by inward feeling or reflexion, and that of other spirits by reason. we may be said to have some knowledge or notion of our own minds, of spirits and active beings, whereof in a strict sense we have not ideas. in like manner, we know and have a notion of relations between things or ideas which relations are distinct from the ideas or things related, inasmuch as the latter may be perceived by us without our perceiving the former. to me it seems that ideas, spirits, and relations are all in their respective kinds the object of human knowledge and subject of discourse; and that the term idea would be improperly extended to signify everything we know or have any notion of.
if we are to erect a firm system of sound and real knowledge that can withstand the assaults of scepticism, nothing is more important, it seems, than to provide it with a beginning in a distinct account of what is meant by thing, reality, existence: for it will be pointless to dispute concerning things real existence, or claim to have any knowledge of it, when we haven't fixed the meaning of those words. thing or being is the most general name of all; it applies to two entirely distinct and unalike kinds of item, which have nothing in common but the name; they are spirits and ideas. the former are active, indivisible substances: the latter are inert, fleeting, dependent beings, which don't exist by themselves, but are supported by or exist in minds or spiritual substances. we comprehend our own existence by inward feeling or reflection, and that of other spirits by reason. we may be said to have some knowledge or notion of our own minds, of spirits and active beings, although we don't in a strict sense have ideas of them. similarly we know and have a notion of relations between things or ideas, which relations are distinct from the ideas or things related, because the ideas may be perceived by us without our perceiving the relations. to me it seems that we can know about and talk about ideas, spirits, and relations, and that it would be improper to extend the term idea to signify everything we know or have any notion of.

external things either imprinted by or perceived by some other mind. ideas imprinted on the senses are real things, or do really exist; this we do not deny, but we deny they can subsist without the minds which perceive them, or that they are resemblances of any archetypes existing without the mind; since the very being of a sensation or idea consists in being perceived, and an idea can be like nothing but an idea. again, the things perceived by sense may be termed external, with regard to their origin in that they are not generated from within by the mind itself, but imprinted by a spirit distinct from that which perceives them. sensible objects may likewise be said to be without the mind in another sense, namely when they exist in some other mind; thus, when i shut my eyes, the things i saw may still exist, but it must be in another mind.
ideas imprinted on the senses are real things, or do really exist. i don't deny that; but i deny that they can exist outside the minds that perceive them, and that they resemble anything existing outside the mind since the very being of a sensation or idea consists in being perceived, and the only thing an idea can resemble is an idea. the things perceived by sense can be called external with regard to their origin, because they aren't generated from within by the mind itself, but imprinted from outside by a spirit other than the one that perceives them. perceptible objects can also be said to be outside the mind in another sense, namely, when they exist in some other mind. thus when i shut my eyes, the things i saw may still exist, but it must be in another mind.

sensible qualities real. it were a mistake to think that what is here said derogates in the least from the reality of things. it is acknowledged, on the received principles, that extension, motion, and in a word all sensible qualities have need of a support, as not being able to subsist by themselves. but the objects perceived by sense are allowed to be nothing but combinations of those qualities, and consequently cannot subsist by themselves. thus far it is agreed on all hand. so that in denying the things perceived by sense an existence independent of a substance of support wherein they may exist, we detract nothing from the received opinion of their reality, and are guilty of no innovation in that respect. all the difference is that, according to us, the unthinking beings perceived by sense have no existence distinct from being perceived, and cannot therefore exist in any other substance than those unextended indivisible substances or spirits which act and think and perceive them; whereas philosophers vulgarly hold that the sensible qualities do exist in an inert, extended, unperceiving substance which they call matter, to which they attribute a natural subsistence, exterior to all thinking beings, or distinct from being perceived by any mind whatsoever, even the eternal mind of the creator, wherein they suppose only ideas of the corporeal substances created by him; if indeed they allow them to be at all created.
it would be a mistake to think that what i am saying here detracts in the least from the reality of things. it is acknowledged on the generally accepted principles that all perceptible qualities extension, motion, and the rest need a support because they can't exist by themselves. but the objects perceived by sense are admitted to be nothing but combinations of those qualities, and so they can't exist by themselves. up to this point we all agree. so that when i deny that the things perceived by sense exist independently of a substance or support in which they may exist, i take nothing away from the received opinion of their reality, and am not guilty of any new doctrine in that respect. the only difference between myself and other philosophers is that according to me the unthinking beings perceived by sense have no existence distinct from being perceived, and cannot therefore exist in any substance other than those unextended, indivisible substances, spirits, which act and think and perceive them; whereas the common run of philosophers hold that the perceptible qualities exist in an inert, extended, unperceiving substance that they call matter, to which they attribute a natural existence outside all thinking beings i.e. distinct from being perceived by any mind whatsoever, even the eternal mind of the creator. the only ideas they suppose to be in god's mind are ideas of the corporeal substances he has created, if indeed they allow that those substances were created.

objections of atheists overturned. for, as we have shown the doctrine of matter or corporeal substance to have been the main pillar and support of scepticism, so likewise upon the same foundation have been raised all the impious schemes of atheism and irreligion. nay, so great a difficulty has it been thought to conceive matter produced out of nothing, that the most celebrated among the ancient philosophers, even of those who maintained the being of a god, have thought matter to be uncreated and co-eternal with him. how great a friend material substance has been to atheists in all ages were needless to relate. all their monstrous systems have so visible and necessary a dependence on it that, when this corner-stone is once removed, the whole fabric cannot choose but fall to the ground, insomuch that it is no longer worth while to bestow a particular consideration on the absurdities of every wretched sect of atheists.
following on from that last remark: just as the doctrine of matter or corporeal substance has as i have shown been the main pillar and support of scepticism, so likewise all the impious schemes of atheism and irreligion have been erected on that same foundation. indeed, it has been thought so difficult to conceive matter produced out of nothing that the most celebrated among the ancient philosophers, even of those who maintained the existence of a god, have thought matter to be uncreated and coeternal with god. i needn't tell the story of how great a friend material substance has been to atheists in all ages. all their monstrous systems depend on it so obviously and so necessarily that once this cornerstone is removed the whole structure of atheism collapses; so that it is no longer worthwhile to attend separately to the absurdities of each wretched sect of atheists.

and of fatalists also. that impious and profane persons should readily fall in with those systems which favour their inclinations, by deriding immaterial substance, and supposing the soul to be divisible and subject to corruption as the body; which exclude all freedom, intelligence, and design from the formation of things, and instead thereof make a self existent, stupid, unthinking substance the root and origin of all beings; that they should hearken to those who deny a providence, or inspection of a superior mind over the affairs of the world, attributing the whole series of events either to blind chance or fatal necessity arising from the impulse of one body or another all this is very natural. and, on the other hand, when men of better principles observe the enemies of religion lay so great a stress on unthinking matter, and all of them use so much industry and artifice to reduce everything to it, methinks they should rejoice to see them deprived of their grand support, and driven from that only fortress, without which your epicureans, hobbists, and the like, have not even the shadow of a pretence, but become the most cheap and easy triumph in the world.
it is very natural that impious and profane people should readily accept systems that favour their inclinations, by mocking immaterial substance and supposing the soul to be divisible and subject to decay as the body is; systems that exclude all freedom, intelligence, and design from the formation of things, and instead make a self-existent, stupid, unthinking substance the root and origin of all things. it is also natural that they should listen to those who deny a providence, or a superior mind surveying the affairs of the world, attributing the whole series of events either to blind chance or fatal necessity, arising from collisions of bodies. and when on the other hand men with better principles see the enemies of religion putting so much stress on unthinking matter, all of them working so hard and ingeniously to reduce everything to it, i think they should rejoice to see them deprived of their grand support, and driven from their only fortress. without that fortress of materialism, epicureans, hobbists and the like haven't so much as the shadow of something to say, and winning the argument against them becomes the most cheap and easy triumph in the world.

of idolators. the existence of matter, or bodies unperceived, has not only been the main support of atheists and fatalists, but on the same principle doth idolatry likewise in all its various forms depend. did men but consider that the sun, moon, and stars, and every other object of the senses are only so many sensations in their minds, which have no other existence but barely being perceived, doubtless they would never fall down and worship their own ideas, but rather address their homage to that eternal invisible mind which produces and sustains all things.
the existence of matter, or unperceived bodies, has been the main support not only of atheists and fatalists but also of idolatry in all its various forms. if men would only consider that the sun, moon, and stars, and every other object of the senses are nothing but sensations in their minds, having no existence except in being perceived, no doubt they would never fall down and worship their own ideas! rather, they would do homage to god, that eternal invisible mind that produces and sustains all things.

and socinians. the same absurd principle, by mingling itself with the articles of our faith, has occasioned no small difficulties to christians. for example, about the resurrection, how many scruples and objections have been raised by socinians and others? but do not the most plausible of them depend on the supposition that a body is denominated the same, with regard not to the form or that which is perceived by sense, but the material substance, which remains the same under several forms? take away this material substance, about the identity whereof all the dispute is, and mean by body what every plain ordinary person means by that word, to wit, that which is immediately seen and felt, which is only a combination of sensible qualities or ideas, and then their most unanswerable objections come to nothing.
the same absurd principle of materialism, by mingling itself with the principles of our faith, has given considerable difficulties to christians. think how many scruples and objections have been raised by socinians and others concerning the resurrection! don't the most plausible of them depend on the supposition that sameness of a body comes not from its form i.e. what is perceived by sense but from the material substance that remains the same in different forms? all the dispute is about the identity of this material substance; take it away, and mean by body what every plain ordinary person means by it namely that which is immediately seen and felt, which is only a combination of perceptible qualities or ideas and then the seemingly most unanswerable objections of the socinians etc. come to nothing.

summary of the consequences of expelling matter. matter being once expelled out of nature drags with it so many sceptical and impious notions, such an incredible number of disputes and puzzling questions, which have been thorns in the sides of divines as well as philosophers, and made so much fruitless work for mankind, that if the arguments we have produced against it are not found equal to demonstration as to me they evidently see, yet i am sure all friends to knowledge, peace, and religion have reason to wish they were.
when matter is expelled out of nature, it drags with it so many sceptical and impious notions, such an incredible number of disputes and puzzling questions that have been thorns in the sides of theologians as well as philosophers, and made so much fruitless work for mankind, that if the arguments that i have produced against it are not found to be perfectly conclusive which i think they obviously are, i am sure all the friends of knowledge, peace, and religion have reason to wish they were.

beside the external existence of the objects of perception, another great source of errors and difficulties with regard to ideal knowledge is the doctrine of abstract ideas, such as it has been set forth in the introduction. the plainest things in the world, those we are most intimately acquainted with and perfectly know, when they are considered in an abstract way, appear strangely difficult and incomprehensible. time, place, and motion, taken in particular or concrete, are what everybody knows, but, having passed through the hands of a metaphysician, they become too abstract and fine to be apprehended by men of ordinary sense. bid your servant meet you at such a time in such a place, and he shall never stay to deliberate on the meaning of those words; in conceiving that particular time and place, or the motion by which he is to get thither, he finds not the least difficulty. but if time be taken exclusive of all those particular actions and ideas that diversify the day, merely for the continuation of existence or duration in abstract, then it will perhaps gravel even a philosopher to comprehend it.
knowledge relating to ideas has suffered errors and difficulties not only from the belief in the external existence of the objects of perception but also from the doctrine of abstract ideas as expounded in my introduction. the plainest things in the world, those we are most intimately acquainted with and perfectly know, appear strangely difficult and incomprehensible when they are considered in an abstract way. everybody knows what time, place, and motion are in particular cases; but when they are passed through the hands of a metaphysician they become too abstract and rarefied to be grasped by men of ordinary sense. tell your servant to meet you at such a time, in such a place, and he will never spend time thinking about the meanings of those words; he has no difficulty at all in understanding that particular time and place, or the movements he has to make to get there. but if time is separated from all the particular actions and ideas that diversify the day, and is taken merely to be the continuation of existence or duration in the abstract, then even a philosopher may be at a loss to understand it.

dilemma. for my own part, whenever i attempt to frame a simple idea of time, abstracted from the succession of ideas in my mind, which flows uniformly and is participated by all beings, i am lost and embrangled in inextricable difficulties. i have no notion of it at all, only i hear others say it is infinitely divisible, and speak of it in such a manner as leads me to entertain odd thoughts of my existence; since that doctrine lays one under an absolute necessity of thinking, either that he passes away innumerable ages without a thought, or else that he is annihilated every moment of his life, both which seem equally absurd. time therefore being nothing, abstracted from the sucession of ideas in our minds, it follows that the duration of any finite spirit must be estimated by the number of ideas or actions succeeding each other in that same spirit or mind. hence, it is a plain consequence that the soul always thinks; and in truth whoever shall go about to divide in his thoughts, or abstract the existence of a spirit from its cogitation, will, i believe, find it no easy task.
whenever i try to form a simple idea of time, abstracted from the succession of ideas in my mind time that flows uniformly and is gone through by all beings i am lost and entangled in inextricable difficulties. i have no notion of it at all. but i hear others say that it is infinitely divisible, and speak of it in a manner that leads me to entertain strange thoughts about my existence. that is because i have no awareness of having passed through an infinity of periods of time, so that the doctrine that time is infinitely divisible absolutely requires me to think either that i exist through innumerable ages without a thought, or else that i am annihilated every moment of my life; and these seem equally absurd. time is therefore nothing when it is abstracted from the succession of ideas in our minds; and from this it follows that the duration of any finite spirit must be estimated by the number of ideas or actions succeeding each other in that spirit or mind. this plainly implies that the soul always thinks; and indeed anyone who tries in his thoughts to separate or abstract the existence of a spirit from its thinking will, i believe, find it no easy task!

so likewise when we attempt to abstract extension and motion from all other qualities, and consider them by themselves, we presently lose sight of them, and run into great extravagances. all which depend on a twofold abstraction; first, it is supposed that extension, for example, may be abstracted from all other sensible qualities; and secondly, that the entity of extension may be abstracted from its being perceived. but, whoever shall reflect, and take care to understand what he says, will, if i mistake not, acknowledge that all sensible qualities are alike sensations and alike real; that where the extension is, there is the colour, too, i.e., in his mind, and that their archetypes can exist only in some other mind; and that the objects of sense are nothing but those sensations combined, blended, or if one may so speak concreted together; none of all which can be supposed to exist unperceived.
similarly, when we try to abstract extension and motion from all other qualities and consider them by themselves, we immediately lose sight of them, and are led to wild conclusions. these all depend on a twofold abstraction: first, it is supposed that extension, for example, can be abstracted from all other perceptible qualities; and secondly, that the existence of extension can be abstracted from its being perceived. but if you think hard and take care to understand what you say, i think you will agree that all perceptible qualities are sensations, and all are real; that where extension is, colour is too namely in your mind and that if they are copies from patterns it must be patterns existing in some other mind; and that the objects of sense are nothing but those sensations combined, blended, or if i may put it this way concreted together none of which can be supposed to exist unperceived.

what it is for a man to be happy, or an object good, every one may think he knows. but to frame an abstract idea of happiness, prescinded from all particular pleasure, or of goodness from everything that is good, this is what few can pretend to. so likewise a man may be just and virtuous without having precise ideas of justice and virtue. the opinion that those and the like words stand for general notions, abstracted from all particular persons and actions, seems to have rendered morality very difficult, and the study thereof of small use to mankind. and in effect the doctrine of abstraction has not a little contributed towards spoiling the most useful parts of knowledge.
everyone may think he knows what it is for a man to be happy, or an object to be good. but few people can claim to make an abstract idea of happiness separated from all particular pleasures, or of goodness separated from everything that is good. similarly a man may be just and virtuous without having precise ideas of justice and virtue. the opinion that words like those stand for general notions, abstracted from all particular persons and actions, seems to have made morality difficult, and the study of it less useful to mankind. and in effect the doctrine of abstraction has contributed greatly towards spoiling the most useful parts of knowledge.

of natural philosophy and mathematics. the two great provinces of speculative science conversant about ideas received from sense, are natural philosophy and mathematics; with regard to each of these i shall make some observations. and first i shall say somewhat of natural philosophy. on this subject it is that the sceptics triumph. all that stock of arguments they produce to depreciate our faculties and make mankind appear ignorant and low, are drawn principally from this head, namely, that we are under an invincible blindness as to the true and real nature of things. this they exaggerate, and love to enlarge on. we are miserably bantered, say they, by our senses, and amused only with the outside and show of things. the real essence, the internal qualities and constitution of every the meanest object, is hid from our view; something there is in every drop of water, every grain of sand, which it is beyond the power of human understanding to fathom or comprehend. but, it is evident from what has been shown that all this complaint is groundless, and that we are influenced by false principles to that degree as to mistrust our senses, and think we know nothing of those things which we perfectly comprehend.
natural science and mathematics are the two great provinces of speculative science that have to do with ideas received from the senses; and i shall make some remarks about each of these, starting with the former. this discussion will run up to the end of 117, after which i shall turn to mathematics. it is with natural science that the sceptics seem to triumph: the great stock of arguments they produce, to belittle our faculties and make mankind appear ignorant and low, are drawn principally from the premise that we are incurably blind as to the true and real nature of things. they exaggerate this, and love to enlarge on it. we are miserably made fools of, they say, by our senses, and fobbed off with the outside, the mere appearance, of things. the real essence the internal qualities and constitution of every little object is hidden from our view; every drop of water, every grain of sand, contains something that it is beyond the power of human understanding to fathom or comprehend. but it is evident from what i have shown that this complaint is wholly groundless, and that false principles are making us mistrust our senses to such an extent that we think we know nothing of things that in fact we comprehend perfectly.

one great inducement to our pronouncing ourselves ignorant of the nature of things is the current opinion that everything includes within itself the cause of its properties; or that there is in each object an inward essence which is the source whence its discernible qualities flow, and whereon they depend. some have pretended to account for appearances by occult qualities, but of late they are mostly resolved into mechanical causes, to wit, the figure, motion, weight, and suchlike qualities, of insensible particles; whereas, in truth, there is no other agent or efficient cause than spirit, it being evident that motion, as well as all other ideas, is perfectly inert. see sect. 25. hence, to endeavour to explain the production of colours or sounds, by figure, motion, magnitude, and the like, must needs be labour in vain. and accordingly we see the attempts of that kind are not at all satisfactory. which may be said in general of those instances wherein one idea or quality is assigned for the cause of another. i need not say how many hypotheses and speculations are left out, and how much the study of nature is abridged by this doctrine.
one great inducement to our pronouncing ourselves ignorant of the nature of things is the opinion which is popular these days that every thing contains within itself the cause of its own properties: or in other words that there is in each object an inner essence that is the source from which its perceptible qualities flow and on which they depend. some have claimed to account for appearances by an essence consisting of secret and mysterious qualities, but recently they are mostly explained in terms of mechanical causes, that is, the shape, motion, weight, etc. of imperceptible particles. but really the only agent or cause is spirit, because obviously motion and all the other ideas are perfectly inert. see 25. hence, to try to explain the production of colours or sounds by shape, motion, size etc. has to be wasted labour. that's why attempts of that kind can always be seen to be unsatisfactory. the same can be said in general, of any explanation that assigns one idea or quality as the cause of another. i needn't say how many hypotheses and speculations we are spared by my doctrine, and how much simpler it makes the study of nature.

attraction signifies the effect, not the manner or cause. the great mechanical principle now in vogue is attraction. that a stone falls to the earth, or the sea swells towards the moon, may to some appear sufficiently explained thereby. but how are we enlightened by being told this is done by attraction? is it that that word signifies the manner of the tendency, and that it is by the mutual drawing of bodies instead of their being impelled or protruded towards each other? but, nothing is determined of the manner or action, and it may as truly for aught we know be termed impulse, or protrusion, as attraction. again, the parts of steel we see cohere firmly together, and this also is accounted for by attraction; but, in this as in the other instances, i do not perceive that anything is signified besides the effect itself; for as to the manner of the action whereby it is produced, or the cause which produces it, these are not so much as aimed at.
the great mechanical principle that is now in vogue is attraction, which seems to some people to provide a good enough explanation of a stone's falling to the earth, or the sea's swelling towards the moon. but how are we enlightened by being told this is done by attraction? is it that this word signifies the kind of tendency that is involved, telling us that the event comes from bodies pulling one another, rather than from their being pushed towards each other? but that tells us nothing about how this pulling is done. for all we know to the contrary, it could as well be called pushing as pulling. again, we see the parts of steel hold firmly together, and this also is accounted for by attraction; but here as in the other examples i can't see that this does more than merely to describe the effect. as for how the effect is produced, or what the cause is that produces it, the explanation in terms of attraction doesn't even try to tell us that.

indeed, if we take a view of the several phenomena, and compare them together, we may observe some likeness and conformity between them. for example, in the falling of a stone to the ground, in the rising of the sea towards the moon, in cohesion, crystallization, etc, there is something alike, namely, an union or mutual approach of bodies. so that any one of these or the like phenomena may not seem strange or surprising to a man who has nicely observed and compared the effects of nature. for that only is thought so which is uncommon, or a thing by itself, and out of the ordinary course of our observation. that bodies should tend towards the centre of the earth is not thought strange, because it is what we perceive every moment of our lives. but, that they should have a like gravitation towards the centre of the moon may seem odd and unaccountable to most men, because it is discerned only in the tides. but a philosopher, whose thoughts take in a larger compass of nature, having observed a certain similitude of appearances, as well in the heavens as the earth, that argue innumerable bodies to have a mutual tendency towards each other, which he denotes by the general name attraction, whatever can be reduced to that he thinks justly accounted for. thus he explains the tides by the attraction of the terraqueous globe towards the moon, which to him does not appear odd or anomalous, but only a particular example of a general rule or law of nature.
it is true that if we consider a number of phenomena together, and compare them, we may observe some likeness and conformity amongst them. for example, in the falling of a stone to the ground, in the rising of the sea towards the moon, and in cohesion and crystallization, there is a similarity because each involves bodies combining or approaching one another. so any phenomenon of that sort may not seem strange or surprising to a man who has accurately observed and compared the effects of nature. when we find an event strange or surprising, it is always something that is uncommon, a thing by itself, out of the ordinary course of our observation. we don't find it strange that bodies tend towards the centre of the earth, because that is what we perceive every moment of our lives. but bodies having a similar gravitation towards the centre of the moon may seem odd and unaccountable to most men, because we see it only in the tides. but things are different with a scientist, whose thoughts take in a larger extent of nature. he observes that certain events in the heavens bear some likeness to ones on the earth, indicating that innumerable bodies tend to move towards each other, and he gives this tendency the general name attraction, and thinks he has explained anything that can be shown to be an instance of it. thus he explains the tides by the attraction of our earth-and-water globe towards the moon; he doesn't find that odd or anomalous, but sees it as only a particular example of a general rule or law of nature.

if therefore we consider the difference there is betwixt natural philosophers and other men, with regard to their knowledge of the phenomena, we shall find it consists not in an exacter knowledge of the efficient cause that produces them for that can be no other than the will of a spirit but only in a greater largeness of comprehension, whereby analogies, harmonies, and agreements are discovered in the works of nature, and the particular effects explained, that is, reduced to general rules, see sect. 62, which rules, grounded on the analogy and uniformness observed in the production of natural effects, are most agreeable and sought after by the mind; for that they extend our prospect beyond what is present and near to us, and enable us to make very probable conjectures touching things that may have happened at very great distances of time and place, as well as to predict things to come; which sort of endeavour towards omniscience is much affected by the mind.
so if we consider how natural scientists differ from other men in respect of their knowledge of phenomena, we shall find that the difference consists, not in a more exact knowledge of the causes that produce phenomena for that can only be the will of a spirit, but rather in a greater breadth of comprehension. through this that is, through the amount of data they take account of scientists can discover analogies, harmonies, and agreements among the works of nature, and can explain particular effects. such explaining consists in bringing events under general rules see 62 that are based on the analogy and uniformness observed in the production of natural effects. we like such rules, and try to find them, because they extend our view beyond what is temporally present and spatially near to us, and enable us to make very probable conjectures about things that may have happened at very great distances of time and place, as well as to predict things to come. this sort of striving towards omniscience is something that the mind likes greatly.

caution as to the use of analogies. but we should proceed warily in such things, for we are apt to lay too great stress on analogies, and, to the prejudice of truth, humour that eagerness of the mind whereby it is carried to extend its knowledge into general theorems. for example, in the business of gravitation or mutual attraction, because it appears in many instances, some are straightway for pronouncing it universal; and that to attract and be attracted by every other body is an essential quality inherent in all bodies whatsoever. whereas it is evident the fixed stars have no such tendency towards each other; and, so far is that gravitation from being essential to bodies that in some instances a quite contrary principle seems to show itself; as in the perpendicular growth of plants, and the elasticity of the air. there is nothing necessary or essential in the case, but it depends entirely on the will of the governing spirit, who causes certain bodies to cleave together or tend towards each other according to various laws, whilst he keeps others at a fixed distance; and to some he gives a quite contrary tendency to fly asunder just as he sees convenient.
but we should proceed cautiously in matters like this, for we are apt to lay too great a stress on analogies, and at the expense of truth to indulge the mind in its eagerness to extend its knowledge into general theorems. for example, gravitation, or mutual attraction, appears in many instances; and this leads some people to rush into calling it universal, maintaining that attracting and being attracted by every other body is an essential quality inherent in all bodies whatsoever. whereas it appears that the fixed stars have no such tendency to move towards each other; and gravitation is so far from being essential to bodies that in some instances a quite contrary principle seems to show itself; as in the upward growth of plants, and the elasticity of the air. there is nothing necessary or essential about any of this; it depends entirely on the will of the governing spirit, who causes certain bodies to stick together or tend towards each other, according to various laws, while he keeps others at a fixed distance; and to some he gives a quite contrary tendency to fly apart, just as he sees convenient.

after what has been premised, i think we may lay down the following conclusions. first, it is plain philosophers amuse themselves in vain, when they inquire for any natural efficient cause, distinct from a mind or spirit. secondly, considering the whole creation is the workmanship of a wise and good agent, it should seem to become philosophers to employ their thoughts contrary to what some hol about the final causes of things; and i confess i see no reason why pointing out the various ends to which natural things are adapted, and for which they were originally with unspeakable wisdom contrived, should not be thought one good way of accounting for them, and altogether worthy a philosopher. thirdly, from what has been premised no reason can be drawn why the history of nature should not still be studied, and observations and experiments made, which, that they are of use to mankind, and enable us to draw any general conclusions, is not the result of any immutable habitudes or relations between things themselves, but only of god's goodness and kindness to men in the administration of the world. see sect. 30 and 31 fourthly, by a diligent observation of the phenomena within our view, we may discover the general laws of nature, and from them deduce the other phenomena; i do not say demonstrate, for all deductions of that kind depend on a supposition that the author of nature always operates uniformly, and in a constant observance of those rules we take for principles: which we cannot evidently know.
after what i have said, i think we may lay down the following conclusions. first, it is clear that philosophers give themselves needless trouble when they look for any natural cause other than a mind or spirit. secondly, considering that the whole creation is the work of a wise and good agent, scientists should think it fitting to employ their thoughts contrary to what some hol about the purposes of things; and i must confess that i see no reason why pointing out the various ends to which natural things are adapted, and for which they were originally with great wisdom contrived, should not be thought to be one good way of accounting for them, and altogether worthy of a scientist. thirdly, what i have said provides no reason why men shouldn't study how things go in the world, making observations and experiments. that these are useful to us, enabling us to draw general conclusions, results not from any unchangeable properties of, or relations between, things themselves, but only from god's goodness and kindness to men in his management of the world. see 30-31. fourthly, by diligently observing the phenomena within our view, we can discover the general laws of nature, and from them deduce further phenomena. i don't say demonstrate; for all deductions of this kind depend on supposing that the author of nature always operates uniformly, constantly keeping to those rules that we regard as principles though we can't know for sure that they are.

three analogies. those men who frame general rules from the phenomena and afterwards derive the phenomena from those rules, seem to consider signs rather than causes. a man may well understand natural signs without knowing their analogy, or being able to say by what rule a thing is so or so. and, as it is very possible to write improperly, through too strict an observance of general grammar rules; so, in arguing from general laws of nature, it is not impossible we may extend the analogy too far, and by that means run into mistakes.
those men who make general rules from phenomena, and afterwards derive phenomena from those rules, seem to be considering signs rather than causes. a man may understand natural signs well without being able to say by what rule a one event is a sign of another. and just as it is possible to write improperly through too strictly observing general rules of grammar, so also in arguing from general rules of nature we may extend the analogy too far and thus run into mistakes.

as in reading other books a wise man will choose to fix his thoughts on the sense and apply it to use, rather than lay them out in grammatical remarks on the language; so, in perusing the volume of nature, it seems beneath the dignity of the mind to affect an exactness in reducing each particular phenomenon to general rules, or showing how it follows from them. we should propose to ourselves nobler views, namely, to recreate and exalt the mind with a prospect of the beauty, order. extent, and variety of natural things: hence, by proper inferences, to enlarge our notions of the grandeur, wisdom, and beneficence of the creator; and lastly, to make the several parts of the creation, so far as in us lies, subservient to the ends they were designed for, god's glory, and the sustentation and comfort of ourselves and fellow-creatures.
in reading ordinary books a wise man will choose to fix his thoughts on the meaning of what he reads, and on its application to his life, rather than bringing to mind grammatical remarks on the language. similarly in reading the book of nature, it seems beneath the dignity of the mind to make a show of exactness in bringing each particular phenomenon under general rules, or showing how it follows from them. we should aim at nobler views, ones that will relax and elevate the mind with a prospect of the beauty, order, extent, and variety of natural things; then enable us by proper inferences from them to enlarge our notions of the grandeur, wisdom, and kindness of the creator; and lastly bring us to do our best to make the various parts of the creation subservient to the ends they were designed for namely, god's glory and the life and comfort of ourselves and our fellow-creatures.

the best key for the aforesaid analogy or natural science will be easily acknowledged to be a certain celebrated treatise of mechanics. in the entrance of which justly admired treatise, time, space, and motion are distinguished into absolute and relative, true and apparent, mathematical and vulgar; which distinction, as it is at large explained by the author, does suppose these quantities to have an existence without the mind; and that they are ordinarily conceived with relation to sensible things, to which nevertheless in their own nature they bear no relation at all.
the best key to natural science is widely agreed to be a certain celebrated treatise of mechanics newton's principia. at the start of that justly admired treatise, time, space, and motion are each distinguished into absolute and relative, or, giving the same distinction in different words, true and apparent, or in yet other words mathematical and vulgar. according to the author's extensive account of it, this distinction does presuppose that time, space and motion exist outside the mind, and that they are ordinarily conceived as relating to perceptible things; but really in their own nature they have no relation to them at all.

as for time, as it is there taken in an absolute or abstracted sense, for the duration or perseverance of the existence of things, i have nothing more to add concerning it after what has been already said on that subject. sect. 97 and 98. for the rest, this celebrated author holds there is an absolute space, which, being unperceivable to sense, remains in itself similar and immovable; and relative space to be the measure thereof, which, being movable and defined by its situation in respect of sensible bodies, is vulgarly taken for immovable space. place he defines to be that part of space which is occupied by any body; and according as the space is absolute or relative so also is the place. absolute motion is said to be the translation of a body from absolute place to absolute place, as relative motion is from one relative place to another. and, because the parts of absolute space do not fall under our senses, instead of them we are obliged to use their sensible measures, and so define both place and motion with respect to bodies which we regard as immovable. but, it is said in philosophical matters we must abstract from our senses, since it may be that none of those bodies which seem to be quiescent are truly so, and the same thing which is moved relatively may be really at rest; as likewise one and the same body may be in relative rest and motion, or even moved with contrary relative motions at the same time, according as its place is variously defined. all which ambiguity is to be found in the apparent motions, but not at all in the true or absolute, which should therefore be alone regarded in philosophy. and the true as we are told are distinguished from apparent or relative motions by the following properties. first, in true or absolute motion all parts which preserve the same position with respect of the whole, partake of the motions of the whole. secondly, the place being moved, that which is placed therein is also moved; so that a body moving in a place which is in motion doth participate the motion of its place. thirdly, true motion is never generated or changed otherwise than by force impressed on the body itself. fourthly, true motion is always changed by force impressed on the body moved. fifthly, in circular motion barely relative there is no centrifugal force, which, nevertheless, in that which is true or absolute, is proportional to the quantity of motion.
as for time, as it is taken by newton in an absolute or abstracted sense, for the duration or continuance of the existence of things, i have nothing to add to what i said about this in 97-8. for the rest, this celebrated author holds that there is an absolute space which, not being perceivable by the senses, is the same everywhere and is immovable: and he takes relative space to be the measure of absolute space, which being movable and defined by its situation in relation to perceptible bodies, is commonly taken to be immovable or absolute space. he defines place as the part of space that is occupied by some body. and according as the space is absolute or relative, so also is the place. absolute motion is said to be the moving of a body from one absolute place to another, as relative motion is from one relative place to another. and because the parts of absolute space don't fall under our senses, instead of them we are obliged to use their perceptible measures, namely parts of relative space; and so we define both place and motion in relation to bodies that we regard as immovable. but, it is said by newton, in scientific matters we must abstract from our senses, since it may be that none of those bodies that seem to be at rest are truly so: and a thing that is moved relatively may be really that is, absolutely at rest. similarly, a single body may at one time be both in relative rest and in motion, or even be moving with contrary relative motions, according as its place is variously defined. all this indeterminacy is to be found in the apparent or relative motions, but not at all in the true or absolute ones, and so science should attend only to the latter. true motions, we are told by newton, are distinguished from apparent or relative ones by the following five properties. in true or absolute motion, anything that keeps the same position in relation to a whole undergoes any motions that the whole undergoes. when a place is moved, anything that is in the place is also moved: so that a body moving in a place that is in motion undergoes the motion of its place. a body never starts to move or changes how it is moving unless a force acts on it. a body's true motion is always changed when force acts on it. in circular motion that is merely relative, there is no centrifugal force; but in true or absolute circular motion there is centrifugal force, which is proportional to the quantity of motion.

motion, whether real or apparent, relative. but, notwithstanding what has been said, i must confess it does not appear to me that there can be any motion other than relative; so that to conceive motion there must be at least conceived two bodies, whereof the distance or position in regard to each other is varied. hence, if there was one only body in being it could not possibly be moved. this seems evident, in that the idea i have of motion doth necessarily include relation.
despite all this, it doesn't appear to me that there can be any motion except relative motion. to conceive motion, it seems to me, one must conceive at least two bodies that alter in their distance from, or position in relation to, each other. hence if there was one only body in existence, it couldn't possibly be moved. this seems obvious, because the idea that i have of motion necessarily includes relation.

apparent motion denied. but, though in every motion it be necessary to conceive more bodies than one, yet it may be that one only is moved, namely, that on which the force causing the change in the distance or situation of the bodies, is impressed. for, however some may define relative motion, so as to term that body moved which changes its distance from some other body, whether the force or action causing that change were impressed on it or no, yet as relative motion is that which is perceived by sense, and regarded in the ordinary affairs of life, it should seem that every man of common sense knows what it is as well as the best philosopher. now, i ask any one whether, in his sense of motion as he walks along the streets, the stones he passes over may be said to move, because they change distance with his feet? to me it appears that though motion includes a relation of one thing to another, yet it is not necessary that each term of the relation be denominated from it. as a man may think of somewhat which does not think, so a body may be moved to or from another body which is not therefore itself in motion.
but although in every motion one must conceive two or more bodies, it can happen that only one of them is moved, namely the one that is acted on by the force causing the change of distance. someone might define relative motion in such a way that a body counts as moving if it changes its distance from some other body, even if the force or action causing that change is not applied to it. but that would be a bad definition, and here is why. relative motion is something we perceived by our senses, something we have to do with in the ordinary affairs of life; so it seems that every man of common sense knows what it is, as well as the best scientist. now, i ask anyone whether, in this sense of motion, the stones under his feet move as he walks along the street, because they change their distances from his feet? it seems to me that though motion includes a relation of one thing to another, it is not necessary that each of the related things be said to move. as a man may think of something that doesn't think, so a body may be moved to or from another body that doesn't move.

as the place happens to be variously defined, the motion which is related to it varies. a man in a ship may be said to be quiescent with relation to the sides of the vessel, and yet move with relation to the land. or he may move eastward in respect of the one, and westward in respect of the other. in the common affairs of life men never go beyond the earth to define the place of any body; and what is quiescent in respect of that is accounted absolutely to be so. but philosophers, who have a greater extent of thought, and juster notions of the system of things, discover even the earth itself to be moved. in order therefore to fix their notions they seem to conceive the corporeal world as finite, and the utmost unmoved walls or shell thereof to be the place whereby they estimate true motions. if we sound our own conceptions, i believe we may find all the absolute motion we can frame an idea of to be at bottom no other than relative motion thus defined. for, as has been already observed, absolute motion, exclusive of all external relation, is incomprehensible; and to this kind of relative motion all the above-mentioned properties, causes, and effects ascribed to absolute motion will, if i mistake not, be found to agree. as to what is said of the centrifugal force, that it does not at all belong to circular relative motion, i do not see how this follows from the experiment which is brought to prove it. see philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica, in schol. def. viii. for the water in the vessel at that time wherein it is said to have the greatest relative circular motion, has, i think, no motion at all; as is plain from the foregoing section.
as the place of a thing happens to be variously defined, so its motion varies. a man in a ship may be said to be motionless in relation to the sides of the vessel, and yet to move in relation to the land. or he may move eastward in respect of the ship and westward in respect of the land. in the common affairs of life, men never go beyond the earth to define the place of any body, so that what is motionless in respect of the earth is thought of as absolutely motionless. but scientists, who have a greater extent of thought and more accurate notions of the system of things, have learned that even the earth itself moves. in order therefore to fix their notions, they seem to conceive the material universe as finite, and its unmoving outer walls or shell to be the place in terms of which they estimate true motions. if we consult our own conceptions, i think we shall find that the only idea we can form of absolute motion is basically the idea of relative motion defined in that manner, i.e. in terms of relations to the outermost shell of the universe. for, as i have already remarked, absolute motion without external relation is incomprehensible; and all the above-mentioned properties, causes, and effects ascribed to absolute motion will, i think, be found to fit with this outer-shell kind of relative motion. as to what is said by newton about centrifugal force, namely that it doesn't at all belong to circular relative motion: i don't see how this follows from the experiment that is brought to prove it. for the water in the vessel, at the time at which it is said to have the greatest relative circular motion, really has no motion at all; as is plain from the foregoing section.in the following section i defend this further.

for, to denominate a body moved it is requisite, first, that it change its distance or situation with regard to some other body; and secondly, that the force occasioning that change be applied to it. if either of these be wanting, i do not think that, agreeably to the sense of mankind, or the propriety of language, a body can be said to be in motion. i grant indeed that it is possible for us to think a body which we see change its distance from some other to be moved, though it have no force applied to it in which sense there may be apparent motion, but then it is because the force causing the change of distance is imagined by us to be applied or impressed on that body thought to move; which indeed shows we are capable of mistaking a thing to be in motion which is not, and that is all.
a body doesn't count as moving unless 1 its distance from, or relation to, some other body alters, and 2 the force or action bringing about that alteration is applied to it rather than to the other body. if either of these is lacking, i don't think that it conforms with how people in general think and speak to say that the body is in motion. i grant indeed that when a body's distance from some other alters, we may think it is moving although no force is acting on it; but if we think this it is because we think of the body in question as having the relevant force applied to it. this shows only that we are capable of wrongly thinking a thing to be in motion when it is not.

any idea of pure space relative. from what has been said it follows that the philosophic consideration of motion does not imply the being of an absolute space, distinct from that which is perceived by sense and related bodies; which that it cannot exist without the mind is clear upon the same principles that demonstrate the like of all other objects of sense. and perhaps, if we inquire narrowly, we shall find we cannot even frame an idea of pure space exclusive of all body. this i must confess seems impossible, as being a most abstract idea. when i excite a motion in some part of my body, if it be free or without resistance, i say there is space; but if i find a resistance, then i say there is body; and in proportion as the resistance to motion is lesser or greater, i say the space is more or less pure. so that when i speak of pure or empty space, it is not to be supposed that the word space stands for an idea distinct from or conceivable without body and motion though indeed we are apt to think every noun substantive stands for a distinct idea that may be separated from all others; which has occasioned infinite mistakes. when, therefore, supposing all the world to be annihilated besides my own body, i say there still remains pure space, thereby nothing else is meant but only that i conceive it possible for the limbs of my body to be moved on all sides without the least resistance, but if that, too, were annihilated then there could be no motion, and consequently no space. some, perhaps, may think the sense of seeing doth furnish them with the idea of pure space; but it is plain from what we have elsewhere shown, that the ideas of space and distance are not obtained by that sense. see the essay concerning vision.
from what has been said, it follows that the scientific consideration of motion doesn't imply the existence of an absolute space, distinct from the space that is perceived by the senses, is related to bodies, and cannot exist outside the mind, as is clear from the principles that prove the same thing of all other objects of sense. if we look into it closely we shall perhaps find that we can't even form an idea of pure space without bodies. this, i must confess, seems impossible, as being a most abstract idea. when i cause a motion in some part of my body, if it is free or without resistance i say there is space; but if i find resistance, then i say there is body; and in proportion as the resistance to motion is lesser or greater, i say the space is more or less pure. so that when i speak of pure or empty space, don't think that the word space stands for an idea that can be conceived without body and motion. we are apt to think every noun stands for a distinct idea that can be separated from all others; and this has led to infinite mistakes. thus, when i say that if all the world were annihilated except for my own body, there would still remain pure space, all i mean is that i conceive it possible in that eventuality for the limbs of my body to be moved on all sides without the least resistance. if my body were also annihilated, there could be no motion, and consequently no space. some people may think that eyesight provides them with the idea of pure space; but it is plain from what i have shown elsewhere that the ideas of space and distance aren't obtained through sight. see the new theory of vision.

what is here laid down seems to put an end to all those disputes and difficulties that have sprung up amongst the learned concerning the nature of pure space. but the chief advantage arising from it is that we are freed from that dangerous dilemma, to which several who have employed their thoughts on that subject imagine themselves reduced, to wit, of thinking either that real space is god, or else that there is something beside god which is eternal, uncreated, infinite, indivisible, immutable. both which may justly be thought pernicious and absurd notions. it is certain that not a few divines, as well as philosophers of great note, have, from the difficulty they found in conceiving either limits or annihilation of space, concluded it must be divine. and some of late have set themselves particularly to show the incommunicable attributes of god agree to it. which doctrine, how unworthy soever it may seem of the divine nature, yet i do not see how we can get clear of it, so long as we adhere to the received opinions.
what i am saying here seems to put an end to all those disputes and difficulties that have sprung up amongst the learned concerning the nature of pure space. its biggest benefit is to free us from that dangerous dilemma, in which some who have thought about this topic see themselves as trapped, namely: having to think either that real space is god, or else that there is something besides god that is also eternal, uncreated, infinite, indivisible, unchanging each of which may fairly be thought pernicious and absurd. it is certain that a good many divines, as well as highly reputed philosophers, have thought that space must be divine, because they could not conceive its being limited or its being annihilated. and recently some such as spinoza have undertaken to show that the attributes of god which cannot be share are possessed by space. however unworthy of the divine nature this doctrine may seem, i don't see how we can avoid it if we adhere to the commonly accepted opinions.

the errors arising from the doctrines of abstraction and external material existences, influence mathematical reasonings. hitherto of natural philosophy: we come now to make some inquiry concerning that other great branch of speculative knowledge, to wit, mathematics. these, how celebrated soever they may be for their clearness and certainty of demonstration, which is hardly anywhere else to be found, cannot nevertheless be supposed altogether free from mistakes, if in their principles there lurks some secret error which is common to the professors of those sciences with the rest of mankind. mathematicians, though they deduce their theorems from a great height of evidence, yet their first principles are limited by the consideration of quantity: and they do not ascend into any inquiry concerning those transcendental maxims which influence all the particular sciences, each part whereof, mathematics not excepted, does consequently participate of the errors involved in them. that the principles laid down by mathematicians are true, and their way of deduction from those principles clear and incontestible, we do not deny; but, we hold there may be certain erroneous maxims of greater extent than the object of mathematics, and for that reason not expressly mentioned, though tacitly supposed throughout the whole progress of that science; and that the ill effects of those secret unexamined errors are diffused through all the branches thereof. to be plain, we suspect the mathematicians are as well as other men concerned in the errors arising from the doctrine of abstract general ideas, and the existence of objects without the mind.
up to here i have written about natural science. now let us enquire into that other great branch of speculative knowledge, namely mathematics. see the start of 101. celebrated though it is for its clearness and certainty of demonstration, which is matched hardly anywhere else, mathematics cannot be supposed altogether free from mistakes if in its principles there lurks some secret error that mathematicians share with the rest of mankind. mathematicians deduce their theorems from premises that are highly certain; but their first principles are confined to the concept of quantity; and they don't ascend into any enquiry concerning those higher maxims that influence all the particular sciences including ones that aren't quantitative. any errors involved in those higher maxims will infect every branch of knowledge, including mathematics. i don't deny that the principles laid down by mathematicians are true, or that their methods of deduction from those principles are clear and beyond dispute. but i hold that there are certain erroneous maxims that spread wider than mathematics, and for that reason are not explicitly mentioned there, though they are tacitly assumed throughout the whole progress of that science; and that the bad effects of those secret, unexamined errors are diffused through all the branches of mathematics. to be plain, i suspect that mathematicians as well as other men are caught in the errors arising from the doctrines of abstract general ideas and of the existence of objects outside the mind.

arithmetic has been thought to have for its object abstract ideas of number; of which to understand the properties and mutual habitudes, is supposed no mean part of speculative knowledge. the opinion of the pure and intellectual nature of numbers in abstract has made them in esteem with those philosophers who seem to have affected an uncommon fineness and elevation of thought. it has set a price on the most trifling numerical speculations which in practice are of no use, but serve only for amusement; and has therefore so far infected the minds of some, that they have dreamed of mighty mysteries involved in numbers, and attempted the explication of natural things by them. but, if we inquire into our own thoughts, and consider what has been premised, we may perhaps entertain a low opinion of those high flights and abstractions, and look on all inquiries, about numbers only as so many difficiles nugae, so far as they are not subservient to practice, and promote the benefit of life.
arithmetic has been thought to have for its object abstract ideas of number. a considerable part of speculative knowledge is supposed to consist in understanding the properties and mutual relations of numbers. the belief in the pure and intellectual nature of numbers in the abstract has won for them the esteem of those thinkers who put on a show of having an uncommon subtlety and elevation of thought. it has put a price on the most trifling numerical theorems that are of no practical use and serve only to pass the time; and it has infected the minds of some people so much that they have dreamed of mighty mysteries involved in numbers, and tried to explain natural things by means of them. but if we look into our own thoughts, and consider the doctrines i have laid down, we may come to have a low opinion of those high flights and abstractions, and to look on all researches into numbers as mere earnest trivialities insofar as they aren't practically useful in improving our lives.

unity in abstract we have before considered in sect. 13, from which and what has been said in the introduction, it plainly follows there is not any such idea. but, number being defined a collection of units, we may conclude that, if there be no such thing as unity or unit in abstract, there are no ideas of number in abstract denoted by the numeral names and figures. the theories therefore in arithmetic, if they are abstracted from the names and figures, as likewise from all use and practice, as well as from the particular things numbered, can be supposed to have nothing at all for their object; hence we may see how entirely the science of numbers is subordinate to practice, and how jejune and trifling it becomes when considered as a matter of mere speculation.
unity in the abstract i have considered in 13. from that discussion and from what i said in the introduction, it plainly follows there is no such idea. but number being defined as a collection of units, we can conclude that if there is no such thing as unity or unit in the abstract, there are no ideas of number in the abstract denoted by names and numerals. therefore, if theories in arithmetic are abstracted from the names and numerals, and also from all use and practical application as well as from particular things that are numbered, they have no subject matter at all. this shows us how entirely the science of numbers is subordinate to practical application, and how empty and trifling it becomes when considered as a matter of mere theory.

however, since there may be some who, deluded by the specious show of discovering abstracted verities, waste their time in arithmetical theorems and problems which have not any use, it will not be amiss if we more fully consider and expose the vanity of that pretence; and this will plainly appear by taking a view of arithmetic in its infancy, and observing what it was that originally put men on the study of that science, and to what scope they directed it. it is natural to think that at first, men, for ease of memory and help of computation, made use of counters, or in writing of single strokes, points, or the like, each whereof was made to signify an unit, i.e., some one thing of whatever kind they had occasion to reckon. afterwards they found out the more compendious ways of making one character stand in place of several strokes or points. and, lastly, the notation of the arabians or indians came into use, wherein, by the repetition of a few characters or figures, and varying the signification of each figure according to the place it obtains, all numbers may be most aptly expressed; which seems to have been done in imitation of language, so that an exact analogy is observed betwixt the notation by figures and names, the nine simple figures answering the nine first numeral names and places in the former, corresponding to denominations in the latter. and agreeably to those conditions of the simple and local value of figures, were contrived methods of finding, from the given figures or marks of the parts, what figures and how placed are proper to denote the whole, or vice versa. and having found the sought figures, the same rule or analogy being observed throughout, it is easy to read them into words; and so the number becomes perfectly known. for then the number of any particular things is said to be known, when we know the name of figures with their due arrangement that according to the standing analogy belong to them. for, these signs being known, we can by the operations of arithmetic know the signs of any part of the particular sums signified by them; and, thus computing in signs because of the connexion established betwixt them and the distinct multitudes of things whereof one is taken for an unit, we may be able rightly to sum up, divide, and proportion the things themselves that we intend to number.
there may be some people who, deluded by the empty show of discovering abstracted truths, waste their time on useless arithmetical theorems and problems. so it will be worthwhile to consider that pretence more fully, and expose its emptiness. we can do this clearly by looking first at arithmetic in its infancy, observing what originally set men going on the study of that science, and what scope they gave it. it is natural to think that at first men, for ease of memory and help in calculations, made use of counters, or in writing made use of single strokes, points, or the like, each of which was made to stand for a unit that is, some one thing of whatever kind they were dealing with at that time. afterwards they discovered the more compact ways of making one symbol stand in place of several strokes or points. for example, the romans used v instead of five points, x instead of ten points, and so on. and lastly, the notation of the arabians or indians the system using 1, 2, 3, etc. came into use, in which, by the repetition of a few characters or figures, and varying the meaning of each figure according to its place in the whole expression, all numbers can be conveniently expressed. this seems to have been done in imitation of language, so that the notation in numerals runs exactly parallel to the naming of numbers in words: the nine simple numerals correspond to the first nine names of numbers, and the position of a simple numeral in a longer one corresponds to the place of the corresponding word in a longer word-using name for a number. thus, for example, 7 corresponds to seven; and the significance of 7 in 734 namely, as standing for seven hundreds corresponds to the significance of seven in seven hundred and thirty-four. and agreeably to those rules about how a numeral's value is determined by its place in the sequence, methods were contrived for working out what row of numerals is needed to name a given number, and what number is named by a given row of numerals. having found the numerals one seeks, keeping to the same rule or parallelism throughout, one can easily read them into words; and so the number becomes perfectly known. for we say that the number of such-and-suches is known when we know the names or numerals in their proper order that belong to the such-and-suches according to the standard system, for when we know these signs, we can through the operations of arithmetic know the signs of any part of the particular sums signified by them; and by thus computing in signs because of the connection established between them and the distinct numbers of things each of which is taken for a unit, we can correctly add up, divide, and proportion the things themselves that we intend to number.

in arithmetic, therefore, we regard not the things, but the signs, which nevertheless are not regarded for their own sake, but because they direct us how to act with relation to things, and dispose rightly of them. now, agreeably to what we have before observed of words in general sect. 19, introd. it happens here likewise that abstract ideas are thought to be signified by numeral names or characters, while they do not suggest ideas of particular things to our minds. i shall not at present enter into a more particular dissertation on this subject, but only observe that it is evident from what has been said, those things which pass for abstract truths and theorems concerning numbers, are in reality conversant about no object distinct from particular numeral things, except only names and characters, which originally came to be considered on no other account but their being signs, or capable to represent aptly whatever particular things men had need to compute. whence it follows that to study them for their own sake would be just as wise, and to as good purpose as if a man, neglecting the true use or original intention and subserviency of language, should spend his time in impertinent criticisms upon words, or reasonings and controversies purely verbal.
in arithmetic therefore we have to do not with the things but with the signs, though these concern us not for their own sake but because they direct us how to act in relation to things, and how to manage them correctly. just as i have remarked concerning language in general 19 intro, so here too abstract ideas are thought to be signified by numerals or number-words at times when they don't suggest ideas of particular things to our minds. i shan't go further into this subject now, except to remark that what i have said shows clearly that the things that are taken to be abstract truths and theorems concerning numbers are really about nothing but particular countable things or about names and numerals, which were first attended to only because they are signs that can aptly represent whatever particular things men needed to calculate about. to study these names or numerals for their own sake, therefore, would be just as wise and pointful as to neglect the true use or original intention and purpose of language, and to spend one's time on irrelevant criticisms of words, or on purely verbal reasonings and controversies.

from numbers we proceed to speak of extension, which, considered as relative, is the object of geometry. the infinite divisibility of finite extension, though it is not expressly laid down either as an axiom or theorem in the elements of that science, yet is throughout the same everywhere supposed and thought to have so inseparable and essential a connexion with the principles and demonstrations in geometry, that mathematicians never admit it into doubt, or make the least question of it. and, as this notion is the source from whence do spring all those amusing geometrical paradoxes which have such a direct repugnancy to the plain common sense of mankind, and are admitted with so much reluctance into a mind not yet debauched by learning; so it is the principal occasion of all that nice and extreme subtilty which renders the study of mathematics so difficult and tedious. hence, if we can make it appear that no finite extension contains innumerable parts, or is infinitely divisible, it follows that we shall at once clear the science of geometry from a great number of difficulties and contradictions which have ever been esteemed a reproach to human reason, and withal make the attainment thereof a business of much less time and pains than it hitherto has been.
from numbers we move on to discuss extension, which considered as relative is the object of geometry. the infinite divisibility of finite extension, though it isn't explicitly asserted either as an axiom or as a theorem in the elements of geometry, is assumed throughout it, and is thought to have so inseparable and essential a connection with the principles and proofs in geometry that mathematicians never call it into question. this notion is the source of all those deceitful geometrical paradoxes that so directly contradict the plain common sense of mankind, and are found hard to swallow by anyone whose mind is not yet perverted by learning. it is also the principal source of all the fine-grained and exaggerated subtlety that makes the study of mathematics so difficult and tedious. so if i can make it appear that nothing whose extent is finite contains innumerable parts, or is infinitely divisible, that will immediately free the science of geometry from a great number of difficulties and contradictions that have always been thought a reproach to human reason, and also make the learning of geometry a much less lengthy and difficult business than it has been until now. my discussion of infinite divisibility will run to the end of 132.

every particular finite extension which may possibly be the object of our thought is an idea existing only in the mind, and consequently each part thereof must be perceived. if, therefore, i cannot perceive innumerable parts in any finite extension that i consider, it is certain they are not contained in it; but, it is evident that i cannot distinguish innumerable parts in any particular line, surface, or solid, which i either perceive by sense, or figure to myself in my mind: wherefore i conclude they are not contained in it. nothing can be plainer to me than that the extensions i have in view are no other than my own ideas; and it is no less plain that i cannot resolve any one of my ideas into an infinite number of other ideas, that is, that they are not infinitely divisible. if by finite extension be meant something distinct from a finite idea, i declare i do not know what that is, and so cannot affirm or deny anything of it. but if the terms extension, parts, &c., are taken in any sense conceivable, that is, for ideas, then to say a finite quantity or extension consists of parts infinite in number is so manifest a contradiction, that every one at first sight acknowledges it to be so; and it is impossible it should ever gain the assent of any reasonable creature who is not brought to it by gentle and slow degrees, as a converted gentile to the belief of transubstantiation. ancient and rooted prejudices do often pass into principles; and those propositions which once obtain the force and credit of a principle, are not only themselves, but likewise whatever is deducible from them, thought privileged from all examination. and there is no absurdity so gross, which, by this means, the mind of man may not be prepared to swallow.
every particular finite extension that could possibly be the object of our thought is an idea existing only in the mind, and consequently each part of it must be perceived. if i cannot perceive innumerable parts in any finite extension that i consider, it is certain that they aren't contained in it: and it is evident that indeed i cannot distinguish innumerable parts in any particular line, surface, or solid that i either perceive by sense or picture to myself in my mind; and so i conclude that no such thing contains innumerable parts. nothing can be more obvious to me than that the extended things i have in view are nothing but my own ideas, and it is equally obvious that i can't break any one of my ideas down into an infinite number of other ideas which is to say that none of them is infinitely divisible. if finite extension means something distinct from a finite idea, i declare that i don't know what it means, and so cannot affirm or deny anything regarding it. but if the terms extension, parts, and the like are given any meaning that we can conceive, that is, are taken to stand for ideas, then to say a finite quantity or extension consists of infinitely many parts is so obvious a contradiction that everyone sees at a glance that it is so. and it could never gain the assent of any reasonable creature who is not brought to it by gentle and slow degrees, like bringing a converted pagan to believe that in the communion service the bread and wine are turned into the body and blood of jesus christ. ancient and rooted prejudices do often turn into principles; and once a proposition has acquired the force and credit of a principle, it is given the privilege of being excused from all examination, as is anything deducible from it. there is no absurdity so gross that the mind of man can't be prepared in this way to swallow it!

he whose understanding is possessed with the doctrine of abstract general ideas may be persuaded that whatever be thought of the ideas of sense extension in abstract is infinitely divisible. and one who thinks the objects of sense exist without the mind will perhaps in virtue thereof be brought to admit that a line but an inch long may contain innumerable parts really existing, though too small to be discerned. these errors are grafted as well in the minds of geometricians as of other men, and have a like influence on their reasonings; and it were no difficult thing to show how the arguments from geometry made use of to support the infinite divisibility of extension are bottomed on them. at present we shall only observe in general whence it is the mathematicians are all so fond and tenacious of that doctrine.
someone whose understanding is prejudiced by the doctrine of abstract general ideas may be persuaded that extension in the abstract is infinitely divisible, whether or not the ideas of sense are. and someone who thinks the objects of sense exist outside the mind may be brought by that to think that a line an inch long may contain innumerable parts really existing, though they are too small to be discerned. these errors abstract ideas, and existence outside the mind are ingrained in geometricians minds as thoroughly as in other men's, and have a similar influence on their reasonings; and it wouldn't be hard to show how they serve as the basis for the arguments that are employed in geometry to support the infinite divisibility of extension. at present i shall only make some general remarks about why the mathematicians cling to this doctrine so fondly.

it has been observed in another place that the theorems and demonstrations in geometry are conversant about universal ideas where it is explained in what sense this ought to be understood, to wit, the particular lines and figures included in the diagram are supposed to stand for innumerable others of different sizes; or, in other words, the geometer considers them abstracting from their magnitude which does not imply that he forms an abstract idea, but only that he cares not what the particular magnitude is, whether great or small, but looks on that as a thing different to the demonstration. hence it follows that a line in the scheme but an inch long must be spoken of as though it contained ten thousand parts, since it is regarded not in itself, but as it is universal; and it is universal only in its signification, whereby it represents innumerable lines greater than itself, in which may be distinguished ten thousand parts or more, though there may not be above an inch in it. after this manner, the properties of the lines signified are by a very usual figure transferred to the sign, and thence, through mistake, though to appertain to it considered in its own nature.
i have pointed out that the theorems and demonstrations of geometry are about universal ideas 15 intro. and i explained in what sense this ought to be understood, namely that the particular lines and figures included in the diagram are supposed to stand for innumerable others of different sizes. in other words, when the geometer thinks about them he abstracts from their size; this doesn't imply that he forms an abstract idea, only that he doesn't care what the particular size is, regarding that as irrelevant to the demonstration. thus, an inch-long line in the diagram must be spoken of as though it contained ten thousand parts, since it is regarded not in its particular nature but as something universal, and it is universal only in its signification, through which it represents innumerable lines longer than it is, in which ten thousand parts or more may be distinguished, even though it is itself a mere inch in length. in this manner the properties of the lines signified are by a very usual figure of speech transferred to the sign, and from that are mistakenly thought to belong to the sign the inch-long line considered in its own nature.

because there is no number of parts so great but it is possible there may be a line containing more, the inch-line is said to contain parts more than any assignable number; which is true, not of the inch taken absolutely, but only for the things signified by it. but men, not retaining that distinction in their thoughts, slide into a belief that the small particular line described on paper contains in itself parts innumerable. there is no such thing as the ten thousandth part of an inch; but there is of a mile or diameter of the earth, which may be signified by that inch. when therefore i delineate a triangle on paper, and take one side not above an inch, for example, in length to be the radius, this i consider as divided into 10,000 or 100,000 parts or more; for, though the ten-thousandth part of that line considered in itself is nothing at all, and consequently may be neglected without an error or inconveniency, yet these described lines, being only marks standing for greater quantities, whereof it may be the ten thousandth part is very considerable, it follows that, to prevent notable errors in practice, the radius must be taken of 10,000 parts or more.
because there is no number of parts so great that there couldn't be a line containing more, the inch-line is said to contain parts more than any assignable number; which is not true of the inch itself but is true for the things it signifies. but men lose sight of that distinction, and slide into a belief that the small particular line drawn on paper has in itself innumerable parts. there is no such thing as the tenthousandth part of an inch; but there is a ten-thousandth part of a mile or of the diameter of the earth, which may be signified by that inch. when therefore i delineate a triangle on paper, and take one inch-long side for example to be the radius of a circle, i consider this as divided into ten thousand or a hundred thousand parts, or more. for though the ten-thousandth part of that line, considered in itself, is nothing at all, and consequently may be neglected without any error or inconvenience, yet these drawn lines are only marks standing for greater lengths of which a tenthousandth part may be very considerable; and that is why, to prevent significant errors in practice, the radius must be taken to have ten thousand parts or more.

lines which are infinitely divisible. from what has been said the reason is plain why, to the end any theorem become universal in its use, it is necessary we speak of the lines described on paper as though they contained parts which really they do not. in doing of which, if we examine the matter thoroughly, we shall perhaps discover that we cannot conceive an inch itself as consisting of, or being divisible into, a thousand parts, but only some other line which is far greater than an inch, and represented by it; and that when we say a line is infinitely divisible, we must mean a line which is infinitely great. what we have here observed seems to be the chief cause why, to suppose the infinite divisibility of finite extension has been thought necessary in geometry.
what i have said makes plain why, if a theorem is to become universal in its use, we have to speak of the lines drawn on the page as though they did have parts that really they don't have. when we speak in this way, if we think hard about what we are doing we'll discover that we cannot conceive an inch itself as consisting of or being divisible into a thousand parts, but only some other line that is far longer than an inch and is represented by it. and we'll discover that when we say that a line is infinitely divisible, we must mean a line that is infinitely long. the procedure i have described here seems to be the chief reason why the infinite divisibility of finite extension has been thought necessary for geometry.

the several absurdities and contradictions which flowed from this false principle might, one would think, have been esteemed so many demonstrations against it. but, by i know not what logic, it is held that proofs a posteriori are not to be admitted against propositions relating to infinity, as though it were not impossible even for an infinite mind to reconcile contradictions; or as if anything absurd and repugnant could have a necessary connexion with truth or flow from it. but, whoever considers the weakness of this pretence will think it was contrived on purpose to humour the laziness of the mind which had rather acquiesce in an indolent scepticism than be at the pains to go through with a severe examination of those principles it has ever embraced for true.
the various absurdities and contradictions that flowed from this false principle might have been expected to count as so many arguments against it. but this didn't happen, because it is maintained i know not by what logic that propositions relating to infinity are not to be challenged on grounds of what follows from them. as though contradictory propositions could be reconciled with one another within an infinite mind! or as though something absurd and inconsistent could have a necessary connection with truth, or flow from it! but whoever considers the weakness of this pretence will think that it was contrived on purpose to humour the laziness of the mind, which would rather slump into an indolent scepticism than take the trouble to carry through a severe examination of the principles it has always embraced as true.

of late the speculations about infinities have run so high, and grown to such strange notions, as have occasioned no small scruples and disputes among the geometers of the present age. some there are of great note who, not content with holding that finite lines may be divided into an infinite number of parts, do yet farther maintain that each of those infinitesimals is itself subdivisible into an infinity of other parts or infinitesimals of a second order, and so on ad infinitum. these, i say, assert there are infinitesimals of infinitesimals of infinitesimals, &c., without ever coming to an end; so that according to them an inch does not barely contain an infinite number of parts, but an infinity of an infinity of an infinity ad infinitum of parts. others there be who hold all orders of infinitesimals below the first to be nothing at all; thinking it with good reason absurd to imagine there is any positive quantity or part of extension which, though multiplied infinitely, can never equal the smallest given extension. and yet on the other hand it seems no less absurd to think the square, cube or other power of a positive real root, should itself be nothing at all; which they who hold infinitesimals of the first order, denying all of the subsequent orders, are obliged to maintain.
recently the theories about infinites have run so high and led to such strange notions that large worries and disputes have grown up among contemporary geometers. some notable mathematicians, not content with holding that finite lines can be divided into an infinite number of parts, also maintain that each of those infinitesimals is itself subdivisible into an infinity of other parts, or infinitesimals of a second order, and so on ad infinitum. i repeat: these people assert that there are infinitesimals of infinitesimals of infinitesimals, without ever coming to an end! according to them, therefore, an inch does not merely contain an infinite number of parts, but an infinity of an infinity of an infinity. ad infinitum of parts. others hold that all orders of infinitesimals below the first are nothing at all, because they reasonably think it absurd to imagine that there is any positive quantity or part of extension which though multiplied infinitely can never equal the smallest given extension. and yet on the other hand it seems no less absurd to think that the square-root, cube-root etc. of a genuine positive number should itself be nothing at all; which they who hold infinitesimals of the first order, denying all of the subsequent orders, are obliged to maintain.

objection of mathematicians. answer. have we not therefore reason to conclude they are both in the wrong, and that there is in effect no such thing as parts infinitely small, or an infinite number of parts contained in any finite quantity? but you will say that if this doctrine obtains it will follow the very foundations of geometry are destroyed, and those great men who have raised that science to so astonishing a height, have been all the while building a castle in the air. to this it may be replied that whatever is useful in geometry, and promotes the benefit of human life, does still remain firm and unshaken on our principles; that science considered as practical will rather receive advantage than any prejudice from what has been said. but to set this in a due light may be the proper business of another place. for the rest, though it should follow that some of the more intricate and subtle parts of speculative mathematics may be pared off without any prejudice to truth, yet i do not see what damage will be thence derived to mankind. on the contrary, i think it were highly to be wished that men of great abilities and obstinate application would draw off their thoughts from those amusements, and employ them in the study of such things as lie nearer the concerns of life, or have a more direct influence on the manners.
doesn't this, then, give us reason to conclude that both parties are in the wrong, and that there are really no such things as infinitely small parts, or an infinite number of parts contained in any finite quantity? you may say that this will destroy the very foundations of geometry, and imply that those great men who have raised that science to such an astonishing height have all along been building a castle in the air. to this i reply that whatever is useful in geometry and promotes the benefit of human life still remains firm and unshaken on my principles. that science, considered as practical, will be helped rather than harmed by what i have said; though to show this clearly fully might require a separate book. for the rest, even if my doctrines imply that some of the more intricate and subtle parts of theoretical mathematics may be peeled off without prejudice to the truth, i don't see what damage this will bring to mankind. on the contrary, it is highly desirable that men of great abilities and tenacious minds should turn their thoughts away from those distractions and employ them in studying things that lie nearer to the concerns of life, or have a more direct influence on how we live.

second objection of mathematicians. answer. if it be said that several theorems undoubtedly true are discovered by methods in which infinitesimals are made use of, which could never have been if their existence included a contradiction in it; i answer that upon a thorough examination it will not be found that in any instance it is necessary to make use of or conceive infinitesimal parts of finite lines, or even quantities less than the minimum sensible; nay, it will be evident this is never done, it being impossible.
it may be said that various undoubtedly true theorems have been discovered by methods in which infinitesimals were used, which couldn't have happened if their existence included a contradiction in it. i answer that when you look into this thoroughly you won't find any case where you need to conceive infinitesimal parts of finite lines, or even quantities smaller than the smallest you can perceive. you'll find that this is never done, because it is impossible. this completes my discussion of infinite divisibility.

if the doctrine were only an hypothesis it should be respected for its consequences. by what we have premised, it is plain that very numerous and important errors have taken their rise from those false principles which were impugned in the foregoing parts of this treatise; and the opposites of those erroneous tenets at the same time appear to be most fruitful principles, from whence do flow innumerable consequences highly advantageous to true philosophy, as well as to religion. particularly matter, or the absolute existence of corporeal objects, has been shown to be that wherein the most avowed and pernicious enemies of all knowledge, whether human or divine, have ever placed their chief strength and confidence. and surely, if by distinguishing the real existence of unthinking things from their being perceived, and allowing them a subsistance of their own out of the minds of spirits, no one thing is explained in nature, but on the contrary a great many inexplicable difficulties arise; if the supposition of matter is barely precarious, as not being grounded on so much as one single reason; if its consequences cannot endure the light of examination and free inquiry, but screen themselves under the dark and general pretence of infinites being incomprehensible; if withal the removal of this matter be not attended with the least evil consequence; if it be not even missed in the world, but everything as well, nay much easier conceived without it; if, lastly, both sceptics and atheists are for ever silenced upon supposing only spirits and ideas, and this scheme of things is perfectly agreeable both to reason and religion: methinks we may expect it should be admitted and firmly embraced, though it were proposed only as an hypothesis, and the existence of matter had been allowed possible, which yet i think we have evidently demonstrated that it is not.
what i have said makes it clear that very numerous and important errors have arisen from the false principles that i have criticized in the earlier parts of this work. and the opposites of those erroneous tenets seem to be very fruitful principles that have innumerable consequences that are highly advantageous to true philosophy as well as to religion. i have shown in detail that matter, or the absolute existence of corporeal objects, has always been the chief source of the strength and confidence of the most openly declared and pernicious enemies of all knowledge, human and divine. and, surely, if by distinguishing the real existence of unthinking things from their being perceived, and allowing them a substance of their own out of the minds of spirits, no one thing is explained in nature, but on the contrary many inexplicable difficulties arise; if the supposition of matter is shaky at best, because there is not so much as one single reason to support it; if its consequences cannot survive the light of examination and free enquiry, but screen themselves under the dark and general claim that infinites can't be understood; if furthermore the removal of this matter doesn't bring the slightest bad consequence, if it is not even missed in the world, but everything is conceived just as well indeed better without it; if, lastly, both sceptics and atheists are forever silenced by the doctrine that there are only spirits and ideas, and this philosophy is perfectly agreeable both to reason and religion; we might expect that it my philosophy would be admitted and firmly embraced, even if it were offered only as an hypothesis, and the existence of matter were allowed as possible, which i have clearly shown that it isn't.

true it is that, in consequence of the foregoing principles, several disputes and speculations which are esteemed no mean parts of learning, are rejected as useless. but, how great a prejudice soever against our notions this may give to those who have already been deeply engaged, and make large advances in studies of that nature, yet by others we hope it will not be thought any just ground of dislike to the principles and tenets herein laid down, that they abridge the labour of study, and make human sciences far more clear, compendious and attainable than they were before.
it is true that my principles reject as useless various disputes and speculations that are widely thought to be important parts of learning. but however great a prejudice against my notions this may give to those who have already been deeply engaged in such speculations and made large advances in studies of that nature, i hope that others won't hold it against my principles and tenets that they shorten the labour of study, and make human sciences more clear, wide-ranging, and manageable than they were before!

having despatched what we intended to say concerning the knowledge of ideas, the method we proposed leads us in the next place to treat of spirits with regard to which, perhaps, human knowledge is not so deficient as is vulgarly imagined. the great reason that is assigned for our being thought ignorant of the nature of spirits is our not having an idea of it. but, surely it ought not to be looked on as a defect in a human understanding that it does not perceive the idea of spirit, if it is manifestly impossible there should be any such idea. and this if i mistake not has been demonstrated in section 27; to which i shall here add that a spirit has been shown to be the only substance or support wherein unthinking beings or ideas can exist; but that this substance which supports or perceives ideas should itself be an idea or like an idea is evidently absurd.
having completed what i planned to say about the knowledge of ideas, my next topic is spirits. we have more knowledge of these than we are commonly thought to have. we don't know the nature of spirits, people think, because we have no ideas of spirits. but i have shown in 27 that it is plainly impossible for there to be an idea of a spirit; so surely it oughtn't to be regarded as a defect in our understanding that it doesn't have any such idea. to the arguments of 27 i shall add one more. i have shown that a spirit is the only substance or support in which ideas can exist; and it is obviously absurd to suppose that this support of ideas should itself be an idea, or be like an idea.

objection. answer. it will perhaps be said that we want a sense as some have imagine proper to know substances withal, which, if we had, we might know our own soul as we do a triangle. to this i answer, that, in case we had a new sense bestowed upon us, we could only receive thereby some new sensations or ideas of sense. but i believe nobody will say that what he means by the terms soul and substance is only some particular sort of idea or sensation. we may therefore infer that, all things duly considered, it is not more reasonable to think our faculties defective, in that they do not furnish us with an idea of spirit or active thinking substance, than it would be if we should blame them for not being able to comprehend a round square.
it may be said and some have said that we lack a sense that would enable us to know substances, and that if we had such a sense we would know our own soul as we do a triangle. our inability to perceive substances, on this view, is like the blind person's inability to see things. to this i answer that if we did have a new sense, all it could present us with would be some new sensations or ideas of sense, just as happens when someone is cured of blindness. but nobody, i think, will say that what he means by soul and substance is only some particular sort of idea or sensation! so when you think it through you can see that regarding our faculties as defective because they give us no idea of spirit or active thinking substance is as unreasonable as criticizing them because they don't enable us to comprehend a round square.

from the opinion that spirits are to be known after the manner of an idea or sensation have risen many absurd and heterodox tenets, and much scepticism about the nature of the soul. it is even probable that this opinion may have produced a doubt in some whether they had any soul at all distinct from their body since upon inquiry they could not find they had an idea of it. that an idea which is inactive, and the existence whereof consists in being perceived, should be the image or likeness of an agent subsisting by itself, seems to need no other refutation than barely attending to what is meant by those words. but, perhaps you will say that though an idea cannot resemble a spirit in its thinking, acting, or subsisting by itself, yet it may in some other respects; and it is not necessary that an idea or image be in all respects like the original.
the opinion that spirits are to be known in the way that ideas and sensations are known has given rise to many absurd doctrines and much scepticism about the nature of the soul. it has probably led some people to doubt whether they had a soul, as distinct from their body, since they couldn't find that they had an idea of it. in fact, the mere meanings of the words are enough to refute the proposition that an idea meaning: something inactive, whose existence consists in being perceive could be the image or likeness of a spirit meaning: an active thing that exists independently of being perceive.

i answer, if it does not in those mentioned, it is impossible it should represent it in any other thing. do but leave out the power of willing, thinking, and perceiving ideas, and there remains nothing else wherein the idea can be like a spirit. for, by the word spirit we mean only that which thinks, wills, and perceives; this, and this alone, constitutes the signification of the term. if therefore it is impossible that any degree of those powers should be represented in an idea, it is evident there can be no idea of a spirit.
although an idea cannot resemble a spirit in its thinking, acting or existing independently, you may say, it may resemble it in other ways. an idea or image of a thing needn't be like it in every respect. i answer that if the idea doesn't resemble the thing in the ways i have mentioned, it can't possibly represent it in any other respect. if you leave out the power of willing, thinking and perceiving ideas, nothing remains in respect of which an idea could resemble a spirit. all we mean by the word spirit is that which thinks, wills, and perceives; this is the whole meaning of that term. so if none of those powers can be represented in an idea, there can be no idea at all of a spirit.

but it will be objected that, if there is no idea signified by the terms soul, spirit, and substance, they are wholly insignificant, or have no meaning in them. i answer, those words do mean or signify a real thing, which is neither an idea nor like an idea, but that which perceives ideas, and wills, and reasons about them. what i am myself, that which i denote by the term i, is the same with what is meant by soul or spiritual substance. if it be said that this is only quarreling at a word, and that, since the immediately significations of other names are by common consent called ideas, no reason can be assigned why that which is signified by the name spirit or soul may not partake in the same appellation. i answer, all the unthinking objects of the mind agree in that they are entirely passive, and their existence consists only in being perceived; whereas a soul or spirit is an active being, whose existence consists, not in being perceived, but in perceiving ideas and thinking. it is therefore necessary, in order to prevent equivocation and confounding natures perfectly disagreeing and unlike, that we distinguish between spirit and idea. see sect. 27.
you may object that if no idea is signified by the terms soul, spirit and substance, they must be meaningless. i answer that those words do mean or signify a real thing, which is neither an idea nor like an idea, but is a thing that perceives ideas, and wills, and reasons about them. i am myself a thing of that kind: what i refer to by the word i is the same as what is meant by soul or spiritual substance. you may object:

our idea of spirit. in a large sense, indeed, we may be said to have an idea or rather a notion of spirit; that is, we understand the meaning of the word, otherwise we could not affirm or deny anything of it. moreover, as we conceive the ideas that are in the minds of other spirits by means of our own, which we suppose to be resemblances of them; so we know other spirits by means of our own soul which in that sense is the image or idea of them; it having a like respect to other spirits that blueness or heat by me perceived has to those ideas perceived by another.
in a broad sense, indeed, we can be said to have an idea or rather a notion of spirit that is, we understand the meaning of the word spirit, otherwise we couldn't use it in affirming or denying things of spirits. furthermore, we suppose that our own ideas resemble ideas in the minds of others; for example, my ideas of blueness or heat resemble the ideas of blueness and heat that other people have. in that sense our own soul is the image or idea of the souls of others because it resembles them. and so we conceive ideas in the minds of other spirits by means of our own ideas, and we know other spirits by means of our own soul.

the natural immortality of the soul is a necessary consequence of the foregoing doctrine. it must not be supposed that they who assert the natural immortality of the soul are of opinion that it is absolutely incapable of annihilation even by the infinite power of the creator who first gave it being, but only that it is not liable to be broken or dissolved by the ordinary laws of nature or motion. they indeed who hold the soul of man to be only a thin vital flame, or system of animal spirits, make it perishing and corruptible as the body; since there is nothing more easily dissipated than such a being, which it is naturally impossible should survive the ruin of the tabernacle wherein it is enclosed. and this notion has been greedily embraced and cherished by the worst part of mankind, as the most effectual antidote against all impressions of virtue and religion. but it has been made evident that bodies, of what frame or texture soever, are barely passive ideas in the mind, which is more distant and heterogeneous from them than light is from darkness. we have shown that the soul is indivisible, incorporeal, unextended, and it is consequently incorruptible. nothing can be plainer than that the motions, changes, decays, and dissolutions which we hourly see befall natural bodies and which is what we mean by the course of nature cannot possibly affect an active, simple, uncompounded substance; such a being therefore is indissoluble by the force of nature; that is to say, the soul of man is naturally immortal.
those who assert that the soul is naturally immortal mustn't be thought to mean that nothing, not even the infinite power of the creator who first brought it into existence, could possibly annihilate the soul. their view is merely that the soul is not at risk of being broken or pulled apart in accordance with the ordinary laws of nature or motion. some people think the soul of man to be only a thin living flame, or a gaseous system of animal spirits; and on that view it is as easily destructible as the body, because nothing is more easily dissipated than flame or gas, which couldn't possibly survive the ruin of the body that houses it. this view that the soul is naturally perishable has been eagerly embraced and cherished by the worst people, who see it as the strongest antidote to virtue and religion. but i have shown clearly that bodies, no matter what their structure or materials, including flames and animal spirits, are merely passive ideas in the mind. the mind itself is more unlike them than light is unlike darkness. i have shown that the soul is indivisible, incorporeal, unextended, and it is therefore incapable of being destroyed by natural processes. it can't fall apart because it has no parts. what we call the course of nature is a series of motions, changes, decays and disintegrations that we see natural bodies undergoing constantly; none of this can possibly affect an active, simple, uncompounded substance: such a being therefore is indissoluble by the force of nature, which is to say that the human soul is naturally immortal.

after what has been said, it is, i suppose, plain that our souls are not to be known in the same manner as senseless, inactive objects, or by way of idea. spirits and ideas are things so wholly different, that when we say they exist, they are known, or the like, these words must not be thought to signify anything common to both natures. there is nothing alike or common in them: and to expect that by any multiplication or enlargement of our faculties we may be enabled to know a spirit as we do a triangle, seems as absurd as if we should hope to see a sound. this is inculcated because i imagine it may be of moment towards clearing several important questions, and preventing some very dangerous errors concerning the nature of the soul. we may not, i think, strictly be said to have an idea of an active being, or of an action, although we may be said to have a notion of them. i have some knowledge or notion of my mind, and its acts about ideas, inasmuch as i know or understand what is meant by these words. what i know, that i have some notion of. i will not say that the terms idea and notion may not be used convertibly, if the world will have it so; but yet it conduceth to clearness and propriety that we distinguish things very different by different names. it is also to be remarked that, all relations including an act of the mind, we cannot so properly be said to have an idea, but rather a notion of the relations and habitudes between things. but if, in the modern way, the word idea is extended to spirits, and relations, and acts, this is, after all, an affair of verbal concern.
what i have said presumably makes it clear that our souls cannot be known in the way that senseless, inactive objects are known; that is, we can't know them by having ideas of them. we can say of both spirits and ideas that they exist, are known and so on, but these words don't mean that spirits have anything in common with ideas. they aren't alike in any respect; and we have no more chance of increasing our powers so that we can know a spirit as we do a triangle than we have of becoming able to see a sound! i emphasize this because i think it may help us to cleari up several important questions and prevent some dangerous errors about the nature of the soul. although it isn't strictly right to say that we have an idea of an active being or of an action, we can be said to have a notion of them. i have some knowledge or notion of my mind and of how it acts with regard to ideas, in that i know or understand what is meant by those words. when i know something, i have some notion of it. the terms idea and notion could be treated as interchangeable with one another, if that is what people want; but we speak more clearly and properly when we distinguish very different things by giving them different names. incidentally, because relations include an act of the mind it is less strictly accurate to say that we have ideas of relations and relational properties than to say that we have notions of them. but these days the word idea is used more broadly, to cover spirits and relations and acts; and there's no point in fussing about this, because it is after all a verbal matter.

it will not be amiss to add, that the doctrine of abstract ideas has had no small share in rendering those sciences intricate and obscure which are particularly conversant about spiritual things. men have imagined they could frame abstract notions of the powers and acts of the mind, and consider them prescinded as well from the mind or spirit itself, as from their respective objects and effects. hence a great number of dark and ambiguous terms, presumed to stand for abstract notions, have been introduced into metaphysics and morality, and from these have grown infinite distractions and disputes amongst the learned.
i should add that the doctrine of abstract ideas has had a large share in making intricate and obscure those sciences that focus on spiritual things. men have imagined they could form abstract notions of the powers and acts of the mind, and could consider them apart from the mind or spirit itself, and also apart from their respective objects and effects. in this way a great many dark and indeterminate words, presumed to stand for abstract notions, have been introduced into metaphysics and morality, and from these have grown countless distractions and disputes amongst the learned.

but, nothing seems more to have contributed towards engaging men in controversies and mistakes with regard to the nature and operations of the mind, than the being used to speak of those things in terms borrowed from sensible ideas. for example, the will is termed the motion of the soul; this infuses a belief that the mind of man is as a ball in motion, impelled and determined by the objects of sense, as necessarily as that is by the stroke of a racket. hence arise endless scruples and errors of dangerous consequence in morality. all which, i doubt not, may be cleared, and truth appear plain, uniform, and consistent, could but philosophers be prevailed on to retire into themselves, and attentively consider their own meaning.
but nothing seems to have contributed more to pulling men into controversies and mistakes about the nature and operations of the mind than their custom of speaking of them in terms borrowed from perceptible ideas. the will is termed the motion of the soul; which encourages people to liken the mind of man to a ball in motion, pushed and determined by the objects of sense as necessarily as the ball is by the stroke of a racket. this creates endless worries and dangerous errors in morality. all this could be cleared up, and the truth be made to appear plain, uniform, and consistent, if philosophers would only look into themselves and think hard about what they mean by what they say.

knowledge of spirits not immediate. from what has been said, it is plain that we cannot know the existence of other spirits otherwise than by their operations, or the ideas by them excited in us. i perceive several motions, changes, and combinations of ideas, that inform me there are certain particular agents, like myself, which accompany them and concur in their production. hence, the knowledge i have of other spirits is not immediate, as is the knowledge of my ideas; but depending on the intervention of ideas, by me referred to agents or spirits distinct from myself, as effects or concomitant signs.
from what i have said, it is clear that the only way we can know that there are other spirits is through what they do that is, the ideas they arouse in us. some of the changes and recombinations that i perceive among my ideas inform me there are certain particular agents like myself, which accompany those ideas and concur in their production in my mind. whereas i know about my own ideas immediately, my knowledge of other spirits is not immediate; it depends on the intervention of ideas that i take to be effects or signs of agents spirits other than myself.

but, though there be some things which convince us human agents are concerned in producing them; yet it is evident to every one that those things which are called the works of nature, that is, the far greater part of the ideas or sensations perceived by us, are not produced by, or dependent on, the wills of men. there is therefore some other spirit that causes them; since it is repugnant that they should subsist by themselves. see sect. 29. but, if we attentively consider the constant regularity, order, and concatenation of natural things, the surprising magnificence, beauty, and perfection of the larger, and the exquisite contrivance of the smaller parts of creation, together with the exact harmony and correspondence of the whole, but above all the never-enough-admired laws of pain and pleasure, and the instincts or natural inclinations, appetites, and passions of animals; i say if we consider all these things, and at the same time attend to the meaning and import of the attributes one, eternal, infinitely wise, good, and perfect, we shall clearly perceive that they belong to the aforesaid spirit, who works all in all, and by whom all things consist.
those other agents, however, are not all human. though we are sometimes convinced that human agents are involved in producing some events. everyone can see that the things we call the works of nature that is, the great majority of the ideas or sensations that we perceive are not produced by human wills and don't depend on them in any way. so there must be some other spirit that causes them, since it is contradictory that they should exist by themselves. see 29. what is the nature of that other spirit? here is how we can find out. we can attend carefully to how regular, orderly and inter-connected natural things are; to the surprising magnificence, beauty and perfection of the larger parts of the creation, and the delicately intricate way in which its smaller parts are arranged; to how harmoniously all the parts fit together; and, above all this being something that we don't view with the astonishment it deserves to the laws of pain and pleasure, and the instincts that is, the natural inclinations, appetites, and emotions of animals. if while considering all this we also attend to the nature of the attributes one, eternal, infinitely wise, good and perfect, we shall see clearly that they are attributes of that spirit i have mentioned the one who makes everything happen and gives everything its reality.

the existence of god more evident than that of man. hence, it is evident that god is known as certainly and immediately as any other mind or spirit whatsoever distinct from ourselves. we may even assert that the existence of god is far more evidently perceived than the existence of men; because the effects of nature are infinitely more numerous and considerable than those ascribed to human agents. there is not any one mark that denotes a man, or effect produced by him, which does not more strongly evince the being of that spirit who is the author of nature. for, it is evident that in affecting other persons the will of man has no other object than barely the motion of the limbs of his body; but that such a motion should be attended by, or excite any idea in the mind of another, depends wholly on the will of the creator. he alone it is who, upholding all things by the word of his power, maintains that intercourse between spirits whereby they are able to perceive the existence of each other. and yet this pure and clear light which enlightens every one is itself invisible.
clearly, then, we know god as certainly and immediately as we know any mind or spirit other than ourselves. indeed, god's existence is far more evidently perceived than the existence of other men, because nature has infinitely more and bigger effects than those that are attributed to human agents. indeed, the things that are done by humans are at the same time effects of nature that is, they are also done by god. every sign of a man's existence that is, every effect produced by a man points even more strongly to the existence of that spirit who is the author of nature. here is why. when you have an effect on me, all that you actually will to do is to move your own limbs or larynx; that the movements you make with your body should lead to any change in the ideas in my mind depends wholly on the will of the creator. it is he alone who keeps other spirits in step with one another in such a way that they can perceive one another's existence. yet this pure, clear light that illuminates us all, making us visible to one another, is in itself invisible.

it seems to be a general pretence of the unthinking herd that they cannot see god. could we but see him, say they, as we see a man, we should believe that he is, and believing obey his commands. but alas, we need only open our eyes to see the sovereign lord of all things, with a more full and clear view than we do any one of our fellow creatures. not that i imagine we see god as some will have it by a direct and immediate view; or see corporeal things, not by themselves, but by seeing that which represents them in the essence of god, which doctrine is, i must confess, to me incomprehensible. but i shall explain my meaning; a human spirit or person is not perceived by sense, as not being an idea; when therefore we see the colour, size, figure, and motions of a man, we perceive only certain sensations or ideas excited in our own minds; and these being exhibited to our view in sundry distinct collections, serve to mark out unto us the existence of finite and created spirits like ourselves. hence it is plain we do not see a man if by man is meant that which lives, moves, perceives, and thinks as we do but only such a certain collection of ideas as directs us to think there is a distinct principle of thought and motion, like to ourselves, accompanying and represented by it. and after the same manner we see god; all the difference is that, whereas some one finite and narrow assemblage of ideas denotes a particular human mind, whithersoever we direct our view, we do at all times and in all places perceive manifest tokens of the divinity: everything we see, hear, feel, or anywise perceive by sense, being a sign or effect of the power of god; as is our perception of those very motions which are produced by men.
the unthinking herd all seem to hold that they cannot see god. if only we could see him in the way we see a man, they say, we would believe that he exists and, as believers, obey his commands. but, unfortunately for them, we need only open our eyes to have a fuller and clearer view of the sovereign lord of all things than we have of any one of our fellow-creatures! i am not supposing that we have a direct and immediate view of god as some think we do, or that when we see bodies we do so not directly but rather by seeing something that represents them in the essence of god as malebranche thinks we do a doctrine that i confess to finding incomprehensible. let me explain what i do mean. a human spirit or person isn't perceived by sense, because it isn't an idea; so when we see the colour, size, shape, and motions of a man, all we perceive are certain sensations or ideas caused in our own minds; and these, being exhibited to us in various distinct collections, serve to indicate to us the existence of finite created spirits like ourselves. clearly, then, we don't see a man, if by man is meant something that lives, moves, perceives, and thinks as we do. what we perceive is a certain collection of ideas that leads us to think there is a distinct source of thought and motion like ourselves, accompanying it and represented by it. that is also how we see god. the only difference is that whereas some one finite and narrow assemblage of ideas points to a particular human mind, we perceive clear indications of the divinity wherever we look, at any time and in any place. that is because everything we see, hear, feel, or in any way perceive by sense is a sign or effect of the power of god; as is our perception of the motions that are produced by men.

it is therefore plain that nothing can be more evident to any one that is capable of the least reflexion than the existence of god, or a spirit who is intimately present to our minds, producing in them all that variety of ideas or sensations which continually affect us, on whom we have an absolute and entire dependence, in short in whom we live, and move, and have our being. that the discovery of this great truth, which lies so near and obvious to the mind, should be attained to by the reason of so very few, is a sad instance of the stupidity and inattention of men, who, though they are surrounded with such clear manifestations of the deity, are yet so little affected by them that they seem, as it were, blinded with excess of light.
clearly, then, nothing can be more evident to anyone who is capable of the least reflection than the existence of god, or a spirit who is intimately present to our minds, producing in them all the variety of ideas or sensations that we continually undergo, on whom we have an absolute and entire dependence, in short, in whom we live and move and have our being. very few people have reasoned their way to this great truth, which lies so near and obvious to the mind. that is a sad example of the stupidity and inattention of men who, though they are surrounded with such clear manifestations of god, are so little affected by them that it is as though they were blinded with excess of light.

objection on behalf of nature. answer. but you will say, has nature no share in the production of natural things, and must they be all ascribed to the immediate and sole operation of god? i answer, if by nature is meant only the visible series of effects or sensations imprinted on our minds, according to certain fixed and general laws, then it is plain that nature, taken in this sense, cannot produce anything at all. but, if by nature is meant some being distinct from god, as well as from the laws of nature, and things perceived by sense, i must confess that word is to me an empty sound without any intelligible meaning annexed to it. nature, in this acceptation, is a vain chimera, introduced by those heathens who had not just notions of the omnipresence and infinite perfection of god. but, it is more unaccountable that it should be received among christians, professing belief in the holy scriptures, which constantly ascribe those effects to the immediate hand of god that heathen philosophers are wont to impute to nature. the lord he causeth the vapours to ascend; he maketh lightnings with rain; he bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures. he turneth the shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark with night. he visiteth the earth, and maketh it soft with showers: he blesseth the springing thereof, and crowneth the year with his goodness; so that the pastures are clothed with flocks, and the valleys are covered over with corn. see psalm 65. but, notwithstanding that this is the constant language of scripture, yet we have i know not what aversion from believing that god concerns himself so nearly in our affairs. fain would we suppose him at a great distance off, and substitute some blind unthinking deputy in his stead, though if we may believe saint pau he be not far from every one of us.
but, you will say, doesn't nature have a share in the production of natural things? must they all be ascribed to the immediate operation of god and nothing else? i answer that if by nature you mean only the visible series of effects or sensations imprinted on our minds according to certain fixed and general laws, then clearly nature in this sense cannot produce anything at all. but if by nature you mean some being distinct from god, from the laws of nature, and from the things perceived by sense, i have to say that the word is to me an empty sound with no intelligible meaning. nature in this meaning of the word is a vain chimera, introduced by heathens who didn't grasp the omnipresence and infinite perfection of god. it is harder to explain its being accepted among christians who profess belief in the holy scriptures; for the latter constantly ascribe to the immediate hand of god the effects that heathen philosophers customarily attribute to nature. but although this is the constant language of scripture, yet christians are weirdly reluctant to believe that god concerns himself so nearly in our affairs. they would prefer to suppose him to be at a great distance from us, and substitute matter, i.e. a blind unthinking deputy in his place, though st. paul says that god is not far from every one of us.

objection to the hand of god being the immediate cause, threefold. answer. it will, i doubt not, be objected that the slow and gradual methods observed in the production of natural things do not seem to have for their cause the immediate hand of an almighty agent. besides, monsters, untimely births, fruits blasted in the blossom, rains falling in desert places, miseries incident to human life, and the like, are so many arguments that the whole frame of nature is not immediately actuated and superintended by a spirit of infinite wisdom and goodness. but the answer to this objection is in a good measure plain from sect. 62; it being visible that the aforesaid methods of nature are absolutely necessary, in order to working by the most simple and general rules, and after a steady and consistent manner; which argues both the wisdom and goodness of god. such is the artificial contrivance of this mighty machine of nature that, whilst its motions and various phenomena strike on our senses, the hand which actuates the whole is itself unperceivable to men of flesh and blood. verily saith the prophet thou art a god that hidest thyself. but, though the lord conceal himself from the eyes of the sensual and lazy, who will not be at the least expense of thought, yet to an unbiased and attentive mind nothing can be more plainly legible than the intimate presence of an all-wise spirit, who fashions, regulates and sustains the whole system of beings. it is clear, from what we have elsewhere observed, that the operating according to general and stated laws is so necessary for our guidance in the affairs of life, and letting us into the secret of nature, that without it all reach and compass of thought, all human sagacity and design, could serve to no manner of purpose; it were even impossible there should be any such faculties or powers in the mind. which one consideration abundantly outbalances whatever particular inconveniences may thence arise.
the slow and gradual methods that are kept to in the production of natural things don't seem to be caused by the immediate hand of an almighty agent. furthermore, monsters, untimely births, fruits blasted in the blossom, rains falling in desert places, miseries incident to human life, are all evidence that the whole frame of nature isn't immediately actuated and superintended by a spirit of infinite wisdom and goodness. but much of the answer to this is plain from 62: those methods of nature are absolutely necessary if things are to go according to the most simple and general rules, and in a steady and consistent manner; and that is evidence for both the wisdom and goodness of god. this mighty machine of nature is so skillfully contrived that while its motions and various phenomena strike on our senses, the hand that drives the whole thing is itself not perceivable by men of flesh and blood. verily, says the prophet thou art a god that hidest thyself isaiah xlv.15. but though god conceals himself from the eyes of sensual and lazy people who won't take the slightest trouble to think, to an unbiassed and attentive mind nothing can be more plainly legible than the close presence of an all-wise spirit who designs, regulates, and sustains the whole system of being. it is clear from what i have pointed out elsewhere that operating according to general and stated laws is necessary for our guidance in the affairs of life, and for letting us into the secret of nature; so much so that without such laws all breadth of thought, all human wisdom and design, would be useless indeed there couldn't be any such faculties or powers in the mind. see 31. that single consideration is far more than enough to counterbalance whatever particular inconveniences may arise from the order of nature.

we should further consider that the very blemishes and defects of nature are not without their use, in that they make an agreeable sort of variety, and augment the beauty of the rest of the creation, as shades in a picture serve to set off the brighter and more enlightened parts. we would likewise do well to examine whether our taxing the waste of seeds and embryos, and accidental destruction of plants and animals, before they come to full maturity, as an imprudence in the author of nature, be not the effect of prejudice contracted by our familiarity with impotent and saving mortals. in man indeed a thrifty management of those things which he cannot procure without much pains and industry may be esteemed wisdom. but, we must not imagine that the inexplicably fine machine of an animal or vegetable costs the great creator any more pains or trouble in its production than a pebble does; nothing being more evident than that an omnipotent spirit can indifferently produce everything by a mere fiat or act of his will. hence, it is plain that the splendid profusion of natural things should not be interpreted weakness or prodigality in the agent who produces them, but rather be looked on as an argument of the riches of his power.
bear in mind also that the very blemishes and defects of nature are of some use, because they make an agreeable sort of variety, and augment the beauty of the rest of the creation, as shadows in a picture serve to set off the brighter and more sunlit parts. you would also do well to think critically about the tendency to charge the author of nature with imprudence because of the waste of seeds and embryos and the accidental destruction of plants and animals before they come to full maturity. doesn't this come from a prejudice that was acquired through familiarity with powerless mortals who have to scrimp and save? we may indeed think it wise for a man to manage thriftily things that he can't acquire without work and trouble. but we mustn't imagine that the inexplicably fine system of an animal or vegetable costs the great creator any more work or trouble in its production than a pebble does; for nothing is more evident than the fact that an omnipotent spirit can casually produce anything by a mere fiat or act of his will. this makes it clear that the splendid profusion of natural things shouldn't be interpreted as weakness or wastefulness in the agent who produces them, but rather be looked on as evidence of how richly powerful he is.

as for the mixture of pain or uneasiness which is in the world, pursuant to the general laws of nature, and the actions of finite, imperfect spirits, this, in the state we are in at present, is indispensably necessary to our well-being. but our prospects are too narrow. we take, for instance, the idea of some one particular pain into our thoughts, and account it evil; whereas, if we enlarge our view, so as to comprehend the various ends, connexions, and dependencies of things, on what occasions and in what proportions we are affected with pain and pleasure, the nature of human freedom, and the design with which we are put into the world; we shall be forced to acknowledge that those particular things which, considered in themselves, appear to be evil, have the nature of good, when considered as linked with the whole system of beings.
as for the mixture of pain or uneasiness that the world contains, as a result of the general laws of nature and the actions of finite imperfect spirits: this, in the state we are in at present, is indispensably necessary to our well-being. but our field of vision is too narrow: we take, for instance, the idea of some one particular pain into our thoughts, and count it as evil; whereas if we take a broader view so as to take in the various ends, connections, and dependencies of things, on what occasions and in what proportions we are affected with pain and pleasure, the nature of human freedom, and the design with which we are put into the world then we shall be forced to admit that particular things that appear to be evil when considered by themselves have the nature of good when considered as linked with the whole system of beings.

atheism and manicheism would have few supporters if mankind were in general attentive. from what has been said, it will be manifest to any considering person, that it is merely for want of attention and comprehensiveness of mind that there are any favourers of atheism or the manichean heresy to be found. little and unreflecting souls may indeed burlesque the works of providence, the beauty and order whereof they have not capacity, or will not be at the pains, to comprehend; but those who are masters of any justness and extent of thought, and are withal used to reflect, can never sufficiently admire the divine traces of wisdom and goodness that shine throughout the economy of nature. but what truth is there which shineth so strongly on the mind that by an aversion of thought, a wilful shutting of the eyes, we may not escape seeing it? is it therefore to be wondered at, if the generality of men, who are ever intent on business or pleasure, and little used to fix or open the eye of their mind, should not have all that conviction and evidence of the being of god which might be expected in reasonable creatures?
from what i have said it will be obvious to any thinking person that the only reason anyone has sided with atheism or with the manichean heresy according to which reality is the product of opposing forces of good and evil is that there has been too little attention and too little breadth of view. thoughtless little souls may indeed mock the works of providence, whose beauty and order they can't or won't take in. but those who are capable of breadth and balance in their thought, and are also thoughtful in temperament, can never sufficiently admire the divine traces of wisdom and goodness that shine throughout the economy of nature. still, what truth is there that shines so strongly on the mind that we cannot escape seeing it by turning our thought away from it, wilfully shutting our eyes? so is it any wonder that the general run of men, who are always intent on business or pleasure, and aren't accustomed to focussing or opening the eye of their mind, should have less conviction and certainty of the existence of god than might be expected in reasonable creatures?

we should rather wonder that men can be found so stupid as to neglect, than that neglecting they should be unconvinced of such an evident and momentous truth. and yet it is to be feared that too many of parts and leisure, who live in christian countries, are, merely through a supine and dreadful negligence, sunk into atheism. since it is downright impossible that a soul pierced and enlightened with a thorough sense of the omnipresence, holiness, and justice of that almighty spirit should persist in a remorseless violation of his laws. we ought, therefore, earnestly to meditate and dwell on those important points; that so we may attain conviction without all scruple that the eyes of the lord are in every place beholding the evil and the good; that he is with us and keepeth us in all places whither we go, and giveth us bread to eat and raiment to put on; that he is present and conscious to our innermost thoughts; and that we have a most absolute and immediate dependence on him. a clear view of which great truths cannot choose but fill our hearts with an awful circumspection and holy fear, which is the strongest incentive to virtue, and the best guard against vice.
we should wonder that there are men so stupid as to neglect such an evident and momentous truth, rather than wondering that they don't believe it, given that they neglect it. and yet it is to be feared that too many intelligent, leisured people who live in christian countries have sunk into a sort of atheism, simply through a slack and dreadful negligence. for it is downright impossible that a soul pierced and enlightened with a thorough sense of the omnipresence, holiness, and justice of that almighty spirit, should persist in remorselessly violating his laws. we ought therefore earnestly to meditate and dwell on those important points, so as to become convinced beyond all doubt that the eyes of the lord are in every place beholding the evil and the good; that he is with us and keeps us in all places to which we go, and gives us bread to eat, and clothes to wear; that he is present and conscious to our innermost thoughts; and that we have a most absolute and immediate dependence on him. a clear view of these great truths cannot but fill our heart with awed caution and holy fear, which is the strongest incentive to virtue and the best guard against vice.

for, after all, what deserves the first place in our studies is the consideration of god and our duty; which to promote, as it was the main drift and design of my labours, so shall i esteem them altogether useless and ineffectual if, by what i have said, i cannot inspire my readers with a pious sense of the presence of god; and, having shown the falseness or vanity of those barren speculations which make the chief employment of learned men, the better dispose them to reverence and embrace the salutary truths of the gospel, which to know and to practice is the highest perfection of human nature.
for, after all, the first place in our studies should be given to the consideration of god and of our duty. the main purpose of my labours has been to promote such a consideration; so i shall regard them as altogether useless and ineffectual if what i have said doesn't inspire my readers with a pious sense of the presence of god, and having shown the falseness or emptiness of those barren speculations that make the chief employment of learned men make them more disposed to reverence and to embrace the salutary truths of the gospel, the knowledge and practice of which is the highest perfection of human nature.

good morrow, hylas: i did not expect to find you abroad so early.
good morning, i didn't expect to find you out and about so early.

it is indeed something unusual; but my thoughts were so taken up with a subject i was discoursing of last night, that finding i could not sleep, i resolved to rise and take a turn in the garden.
it is indeed somewhat unusual: but my thoughts were so taken up with a subject i was talking about last night that i couldn't sleep, so i decided to get up and walk in the garden.

it happened well, to let you see what innocent and agreeable pleasures you lose every morning. can there be a pleasanter time of the day, or a more delightful season of the year? that purple sky, those wild but sweet notes of birds, the fragrant bloom upon the trees and flowers, the gentle influence of the rising sun, these and a thousand nameless beauties of nature inspire the soul with secret transports; its faculties too being at this time fresh and lively, are fit for those meditations, which the solitude of a garden and tranquillity of the morning naturally dispose us to. but i am afraid i interrupt your thoughts: for you seemed very intent on something.
that's good! it gives you a chance to see what innocent and agreeable pleasures you lose every morning. can there be a pleasanter time of the day, or a more delightful season of the year? that purple sky, those wild but sweet notes of birds, the fragrant bloom on the trees and flowers, the gentle influence of the rising sun, these and a thousand nameless beauties of nature inspire the soul with secret raptures. but i'm afraid i am interrupting your thoughts; for you seemed very intent on something.

it is true, i was, and shall be obliged to you if you will permit me to go on in the same vein; not that i would by any means deprive myself of your company, for my thoughts always flow more easily in conversation with a friend, than when i am alone: but my request is, that you would suffer me to impart my reflexions to you.
yes, i was, and i'd be grateful if you would allow me to carry on with it. but i don't in the least want to deprive myself of your company, for my thoughts always flow more easily in conversation with a friend than when i am alone. please, may i share with you the thoughts i have been having?

with all my heart, it is what i should have requested myself if you had not prevented me.
with all my heart! it is what i would have requested myself, if you hadn't asked first.

i was considering the odd fate of those men who have in all ages, through an affectation of being distinguished from the vulgar, or some unaccountable turn of thought, pretended either to believe nothing at all, or to believe the most extravagant things in the world. this however might be borne, if their paradoxes and scepticism did not draw after them some consequences of general disadvantage to mankind. but the mischief lieth here; that when men of less leisure see them who are supposed to have spent their whole time in the pursuits of knowledge professing an entire ignorance of all things, or advancing such notions as are repugnant to plain and commonly received principles, they will be tempted to entertain suspicions concerning the most important truths, which they had hitherto held sacred and unquestionable.
i was considering the odd fate of those men who have in all ages, through a desire to mark themselves off from the common people or through heaven knows what trick of their thought, claimed either to believe nothing at all or to believe the most extravagant things in the world. this wouldn't matter so much if their paradoxes and scepticism didn't bring consequences that are bad for mankind in general. but there's a risk that they will do that, and that when men who are thought to have spent their whole time in the pursuit of knowledge claim to be entirely ignorant of everything, or advocate views that are in conflict with plain and commonly accepted principles, this will tempt other people who have less leisure for this sort of thing to become suspicious of the most important truths, ones they had previously thought to be sacred and unquestionable.

i entirely agree with you, as to the ill tendency of the affected doubts of some philosophers, and fantastical conceits of others. i am even so far gone of late in this way of thinking, that i have quitted several of the sublime notions i had got in their schools for vulgar opinions. and i give it you on my word; since this revolt from metaphysical notions to the plain dictates of nature and common sense, i find my understanding strangely enlightened, so that i can now easily comprehend a great many things which before were all mystery and riddle.
i entirely agree with you about the bad effects of the paraded doubts of some philosophers and the fantastical views of others. i have felt this so strongly in recent times that i have dropped some of the high-flown theories i had learned in their universities, replacing them with ordinary common opinions. since this revolt of mine against metaphysical notions and in favour of the plain dictates of nature and common sense, i swear that i find i can think ever so much better, so that i can now easily understand many things which previously were mysteries and riddles.

i am glad to find there was nothing in the accounts i heard of you.
i am glad to find there was nothing in the accounts i heard of you.

pray, what were those?
what, if you please, were they?

you were represented, in last night's conversation, as one who maintained the most extravagant opinion that ever entered into the mind of man, to wit, that there is no such thing as material substance in the world.
in last night's conversation you were represented as someone who maintains the most extravagant opinion that ever entered into the mind of man, namely that there is no such thing as material substance in the world.

that there is no such thing as what philosophers call material substance, i am seriously persuaded: but, if i were made to see anything absurd or sceptical in this, i should then have the same reason to renounce this that i imagine i have now to reject the contrary opinion.
i seriously believe that there is no such thing as what philosophers call material substance; but if i were made to see anything absurd or sceptical in this, then i would have the same reason to renounce this belief as i think i have now to reject the contrary opinion.

what i can anything be more fantastical, more repugnant to common sense, or a more manifest piece of scepticism, than to believe there is no such thing as matter?
what! can anything be more fantastical, more in conflict with common sense, or a more obvious piece of scepticism, than to believe there is no such thing as matter?

softly, good hylas. what if it should prove that you, who hold there is, are, by virtue of that opinion, a greater sceptic, and maintain more paradoxes and repugnances to common sense, than i who believe no such thing?
steady on, hylas! what if it were to turn out that you who hold that there is matter are by virtue of that opinion a greater sceptic, and maintain more paradoxes and conflicts with common sense, than i who believe no such thing?

you may as soon persuade me, the part is greater than the whole, as that, in order to avoid absurdity and scepticism, i should ever be obliged to give up my opinion in this point.
you have as good a chance of convincing me that the part is greater than the whole as of convincing me that i must give up my belief in matter if i am to avoid absurdity and scepticism.

well then, are you content to admit that opinion for true, which upon examination shall appear most agreeable to common sense, and remote from scepticism?
well then, are you content to accept as true any opinion that turns out to be the most agreeable to common sense, and most remote from scepticism?

with all my heart. since you are for raising disputes about the plainest things in nature, i am content for once to hear what you have to say.
with all my heart. since you want to start arguments about the plainest things in the world, i am content for once to hear what you have to say.

pray, hylas, what do you mean by a sceptic?
tell me, please, what do you mean by a sceptic?

i mean what all men mean one that doubts of everything.
i mean what everyone means, someone who doubts everything.

he then who entertains no doubts concerning some particular point, with regard to that point cannot be thought a sceptic.
so if someone has no doubts concerning some particular point, then with regard to that point he cannot be thought a sceptic.

i agree with you.
i agree with you.

whether doth doubting consist in embracing the affirmative or negative side of a question?
does doubting consist in accepting the affirmative or the negative side of a question?

in neither; for whoever understands english cannot but know that doubting signifies a suspense between both.
neither. anyone who understands english must know that doubting signifies a suspense between the two sides.

he then that denies any point, can no more be said to doubt of it, than he who affirmeth it with the same degree of assurance.
so if someone denies any point, he can no more be said to doubt concerning it than he who affirms it with the same degree of assurance.

true.
true.

and, consequently, for such his denial is no more to be esteemed a sceptic than the other.
and so his denial no more makes him a sceptic than the other is.

i acknowledge it.
i acknowledge it.

how cometh it to pass then, hylas, that you pronounce me a sceptic, because i deny what you affirm, to wit, the existence of matter? since, for aught you can tell, i am as peremptory in my denial, as you in your affirmation.
then how does it happen, hylas, that you call me a sceptic because i deny what you affirm, namely the existence of matter? for all you know, i may be as firmly convinced in my denial as you are in your affirmation.

hold, philonous, i have been a little out in my definition; but every false step a man makes in discourse is not to be insisted on. i said indeed that a sceptic was one who doubted of everything; but i should have added, or who denies the reality and truth of things.
hold on a moment, philonous. my definition of sceptic was wrong; but you can't hold a man to every false step he makes in conversation. i did say that a sceptic is someone who doubts everything; but i should have added,  or who denies the reality and truth of things.

what things? do you mean the principles and theorems of sciences? but these you know are universal intellectual notions, and consequently independent of matter. the denial therefore of this doth not imply the denying them.
what things? do you mean the principles and theorems of sciences? but these, you know, are universal intellectual notions, and have nothing to do with matter, so that the denial of matter doesn't imply the denial of them.

i grant it. but are there no other things? what think you of distrusting the senses, of denying the real existence of sensible things, or pretending to know nothing of them. is not this sufficient to denominate a man a sceptic?
i agree about that. but what about other things? what do you think about distrusting the senses, denying the real existence of sensible things, or claiming to know nothing of them? isn't that enough to qualify a man as a sceptic?

shall we therefore examine which of us it is that denies the reality of sensible things, or professes the greatest ignorance of them; since, if i take you rightly, he is to be esteemed the greatest sceptic?
well, then, let us see which of us it is that denies the reality of sensible things, or claims to have the greatest ignorance of them; since, if i understand you rightly, he is to be counted the greater sceptic.

that is what i desire.
that is what i desire.

what mean you by sensible things?
what do you mean by sensible things?

those things which are perceived by the senses. can you imagine that i mean anything else?
things that are perceived by the senses. can you imagine that i mean anything else?

i do not sufficiently understand you.
i don't properly understand you.

in reading a book, what i immediately perceive are the letters; but mediately, or by means of these, are suggested to my mind the notions of god, virtue, truth, &c. now, that the letters are truly sensible things, or perceived by sense, there is no doubt: but i would know whether you take the things suggested by them to be so too.
in reading a book, what i immediately perceive are the letters on the page, but mediately or by means of these the notions of god, virtue, truth, etc. are suggested to my mind. now, there's no doubt that the letters are truly sensible things, or things perceived by sense; but i want to know whether you take the things suggested by them to be perceived by sense too.

no, certainly: it were absurd to think god or virtue sensible things; though they may be signified and suggested to the mind by sensible marks, with which they have an arbitrary connexion.
no, certainly, it would be absurd to think that god or virtue are sensible things, though they may be signified and suggested to the mind by sensible marks with which they have an arbitrary connection.

it seems then, that by sensible things you mean those only which can be perceived immediately by sense?
it seems then, that by sensible things you mean only those that can be perceived immediately by sense.

right.
right.

doth it not follow from this, that though i see one part of the sky red, and another blue, and that my reason doth thence evidently conclude there must be some cause of that diversity of colours, yet that cause cannot be said to be a sensible thing, or perceived by the sense of seeing? it doth.
doesn't it follow from this that when i see one part of the sky red and another blue, and i infer from this that there must be some cause for that difference of colours, that cause cannot be said to be a sensible thing or perceived by eyesight?

you cannot.
it does.

and when by my touch i perceive a thing to be hot and heavy, i cannot say, with any truth or propriety, that i feel the cause of its heat or weight?
and when by touch i feel a thing to be hot and heavy, i can't say with any truth or correctness that i feel the cause of its heat or weight.

to prevent any more questions of this kind, i tell you once for all, that by sensible things i mean those only which are perceived by sense; and that in truth the senses perceive nothing which they do not perceive immediately: for they make no inferences. the deducing therefore of causes or occasions from effects and appearances, which alone are perceived by sense, entirely relates to reason.
to head off any more questions of this kind, i tell you once and for all that by sensible things i mean only things that are perceived by sense, and that the senses perceive only what they perceive immediately; because they don't make inferences. so the deducing of causes or occasions from effects and appearances (which are the only things we perceive by sense) is entirely the business of reason.

this point then is agreed between us that sensible things are those only which are immediately perceived by sense. you will farther inform me, whether we immediately perceive by sight anything beside light, and colours, and figures; or by hearing, anything but sounds; by the palate, anything beside tastes; by the smell, beside odours; or by the touch, more than tangible qualities.
we agree, then, that sensible things include only things that are immediately perceived by sense. now tell me whether we immediately perceive by sight anything besides light, colours, and shapes; by hearing anything but sounds; by the palate anything besides tastes; by the sense of smell anything besides odours; by touch anything more than tangible qualities.

we do not.
we do not.

it seems, therefore, that if you take away all sensible qualities, there remains nothing sensible?
so it seems that if you take away all sensible qualities there is nothing left that is sensible.

i grant it.
i agree.

sensible things therefore are nothing else but so many sensible qualities, or combinations of sensible qualities?
sensible things, then, are nothing but so many sensible qualities, or combinations of sensible qualities.

nothing else.
nothing else.

heat then is a sensible thing?
so heat is a sensible thing.

certainly.
certainly.

doth the reality of sensible things consist in being perceived? or, is it something distinct from their being perceived, and that bears no relation to the mind?
does the reality of sensible things consist in being perceived? or is it something different from their being perceived something that doesn't involve the mind?

to exist is one thing, and to be perceived is another.
to exist is one thing, and to be perceived is another.

i speak with regard to sensible things only. and of these i ask, whether by their real existence you mean a subsistence exterior to the mind, and distinct from their being perceived?
i am talking only about sensible things. my question is: by the real existence of one of them do you mean an existence exterior to the mind and distinct from their being perceived?

i mean a real absolute being, distinct from, and without any relation to, their being perceived.
i mean a real absolute existence distinct from, and having no relation to, their being perceived.

heat therefore, if it be allowed a real being, must exist without the mind?
so if heat is granted to have a real existence, it must exist outside the mind.

it must.
it must.

tell me, hylas, is this real existence equally compatible to all degrees of heat, which we perceive; or is there any reason why we should attribute it to some, and deny it to others? and if there be, pray let me know that reason.
tell me, hylas, is this real existence equally possible for all degrees of heat that we feel; or is there a reason why we should attribute it to some degrees of heat and not to others? if there is, please tell me what it is.

whatever degree of heat we perceive by sense, we may be sure the same exists in the object that occasions it.
whatever degree of heat we perceive by sense we can be sure exists also in the object that occasions it.

what! the greatest as well as the least?
what, the greatest as well as the least?

i tell you, the reason is plainly the same in respect of both. they are both perceived by sense; nay, the greater degree of heat is more sensibly perceived; and consequently, if there is any difference, we are more certain of its real existence than we can be of the reality of a lesser degree.
yes, because the same reason holds for both: they are both perceived by sense; indeed, the greater degree of heat is more intensely sensibly perceived; so if there is any difference it is that we are more certain of the real existence of a greater heat than we can be of the reality of a lesser.

but is not the most vehement and intense degree of heat a very great pain?
but isn't the most fierce and intense degree of heat a very great pain?

no one can deny it.
no-one can deny that.

and is any unperceiving thing capable of pain or pleasure?
and can any unperceiving thing have pain or pleasure?

no, certainly.
certainly not.

is your material substance a senseless being, or a being endowed with sense and perception?
is your material substance a senseless thing or does it have sense and perception?

it is senseless without doubt.
it is senseless, without doubt.

it cannot therefore be the subject of pain?
so it can't be the subject of pain.

nor consequently of the greatest heat perceived by sense, since you acknowledge this to be no small pain?
nor, consequently, can it be the subject of the greatest heat perceived by sense, since you agree that this is a considerable pain.

what shall we say then of your external object; is it a material substance, or no?
then what are we to say about your external object? is it a material substance, or is it not?

it is a material substance with the sensible qualities inhering in it.
it is a material substance with the sensible qualities inhering in it.

how then can a great heat exist in it, since you own it cannot in a material substance? i desire you would clear this point.
but then how can a great heat exist in it, since you agree it cannot exist in a material substance? please clear up this point.

hold, philonous, i fear i was out in yielding intense heat to be a pain. it should seem rather, that pain is something distinct from heat, and the consequence or effect of it.
hold on, philonous! i'm afraid i went wrong in granting that intense heat is a pain. i should have said not that the pain is the heat but that it is the consequence or effect of the heat.

upon putting your hand near the fire, do you perceive one simple uniform sensation, or two distinct sensations?
when you put your hand near the fire, do you feel one simple uniform sensation or two distinct sensations?

but one simple sensation.
just one simple sensation.

is not the heat immediately perceived?
isn't the heat immediately perceived?

it is.
it is.

and the pain?
and the pain?

true.
true.

seeing therefore they are both immediately perceived at the same time, and the fire affects you only with one simple or uncompounded idea, it follows that this same simple idea is both the intense heat immediately perceived, and the pain; and, consequently, that the intense heat immediately perceived is nothing distinct from a particular sort of pain.
well, then, seeing that they are both immediately perceived at the same time, and that the fire affects you with only one simple or uncompounded idea, it follows that this one simple idea is both the immediately perceived intense heat and the pain; and consequently, that the immediately perceived intense heat is identical with a particular sort of pain.

it seems so.
it seems so.

again, try in your thoughts, hylas, if you can conceive a vehement sensation to be without pain or pleasure.
consult your thoughts again, can you conceive an intense sensation to occur without pain or pleasure?

i cannot.
i cannot.

or can you frame to yourself an idea of sensible pain or pleasure in general, abstracted from every particular idea of heat, cold, tastes, smells? &c.
or can you form an idea of sensible pain or pleasure in general, abstracted from every particular idea of heat, cold, tastes, smells, etc.?

i do not find that i can.
i don't find that i can.

doth it not therefore follow, that sensible pain is nothing distinct from those sensations or ideas, in an intense degree?
then doesn't it follow that sensible pain is nothing but intense degrees of those sensations or ideas?

it is undeniable; and, to speak the truth, i begin to suspect a very great heat cannot exist but in a mind perceiving it.
that is undeniable. in fact, i'm starting to suspect that a very great heat can't exist except in a mind perceiving it.

what! are you then in that sceptical state of suspense, between affirming and denying?
what! are you then in that sceptical state of suspense, between affirming and denying?

i think i may be positive in the point. a very violent and painful heat cannot exist without the mind.
i think i can be definite about it. a very violent and painful heat can't exist outside the mind.

it hath not therefore according to you, any real being?
so according to you it has no real existence.

is it therefore certain, that there is no body in nature really hot?
i admit it. is it certain, then, that no body in nature is really hot?

i have not denied there is any real heat in bodies. i only say, there is no such thing as an intense real heat.
i haven't said that there is no real heat in bodies. i only say that there's no such thing as an intense real heat in bodies.

but, did you not say before that all degrees of heat were equally real; or, if there was any difference, that the greater were more undoubtedly real than the lesser?
but didn't you say earlier that all degrees of heat are equally real, or that if there is any difference the greater heat is more certainly real than the lesser?

true: but it was because i did not then consider the ground there is for distinguishing between them, which i now plainly see. and it is this: because intense heat is nothing else but a particular kind of painful sensation; and pain cannot exist but in a perceiving being; it follows that no intense heat can really exist in an unperceiving corporeal substance. but this is no reason why we should deny heat in an inferior degree to exist in such a substance.
yes, i did; but that was because i had overlooked the reason there is for distinguishing between them, which i now plainly see. it is this: because intense heat is nothing but a particular kind of painful sensation, and pain can't exist except in a perceiving being, it follows that no intense heat can really exist in an unperceiving corporeal substance. but that's no reason for denying that less intense heat can exist in such a substance.

but how shall we be able to discern those degrees of heat which exist only in the mind from those which exist without it?
but how are we to draw the line separating degrees of heat that exist only in the mind from ones that exist outside it?

that is no difficult matter. you know the least pain cannot exist unperceived; whatever, therefore, degree of heat is a pain exists only in the mind. but, as for all other degrees of heat, nothing obliges us to think the same of them.
that isn't hard. the slightest pain can't exist unperceived, as you know; so any degree of heat that is a pain exists only in the mind. we don't have to think the same for degrees of heat that are not pains.

i think you granted before that no unperceiving being was capable of pleasure, any more than of pain.
i think you agreed a while back that no unperceiving being is capable of pleasure, any more than it is of pain.

i did.
i did.

and is not warmth, or a more gentle degree of heat than what causes uneasiness, a pleasure?
well, isn't warmth a milder degree of heat than what causes discomfort or worse a pleasure?

what then?
what of it?

consequently, it cannot exist without the mind in an unperceiving substance, or body.
it follows that warmth can't exist outside the mind in any unperceiving substance, or body.

so it seems.
so it seems.

since, therefore, as well those degrees of heat that are not painful, as those that are, can exist only in a thinking substance; may we not conclude that external bodies are absolutely incapable of any degree of heat whatsoever?
so we have reached the position that degrees of heat that aren't painful and also ones that are can exist only in a thinking substance! can't we conclude from this that external bodies are absolutely incapable of any degree of heat whatsoever?

on second thoughts, i do not think it so evident that warmth is a pleasure as that a great degree of heat is a pain.
on second thoughts, i am less sure that warmth is a pleasure than i am that intense heat is a pain.

i do not pretend that warmth is as great a pleasure as heat is a pain. but, if you grant it to be even a small pleasure, it serves to make good my conclusion.
i don't claim that warmth is as great a pleasure as heat is a pain. but if you admit it to be even a small pleasure, that is enough to yield my conclusion.

i could rather call it an indolence. it seems to be nothing more than a privation of both pain and pleasure. and that such a quality or state as this may agree to an unthinking substance, i hope you will not deny.
i could rather call it absence of pain. it seems to be merely the lack of pain and of pleasure. i hope you won't deny that this quality or state is one that an unthinking substance can have!

if you are resolved to maintain that warmth, or a gentle degree of heat, is no pleasure, i know not how to convince you otherwise than by appealing to your own sense. but what think you of cold?
if you are determined to maintain that warmth is not a pleasure, i don't know how to convince you otherwise except by appealing to your own experience. but what do you think about cold?

the same that i do of heat. an intense degree of cold is a pain; for to feel a very great cold, is to perceive a great uneasiness: it cannot therefore exist without the mind; but a lesser degree of cold may, as well as a lesser degree of heat.
the same as i do about heat. an intense degree of cold is a pain; for to feel a very great cold is to experience a great discomfort, so it can't exist outside the mind. but a lesser degree of cold can exist outside the mind, as well as a lesser degree of heat.

those bodies, therefore, upon whose application to our own, we perceive a moderate degree of heat, must be concluded to have a moderate degree of heat or warmth in them; and those, upon whose application we feel a like degree of cold, must be thought to have cold in them.
so when we feel a moderate degree of heat (or cold) from a body that is applied to our skin, we must conclude that that body has a moderate degree of heat (or cold) in it?

they must.
we must.

can any doctrine be true that necessarily leads a man into an absurdity?
can any doctrine be true if it necessarily leads to absurdity?

is it not an absurdity to think that the same thing should be at the same time both cold and warm?
isn't it an absurdity to think that a single thing should be at the same time both cold and warm?

it is.
it is.

suppose now one of your hands hot, and the other cold, and that they are both at once put into the same vessel of water, in an intermediate state; will not the water seem cold to one hand, and warm to the other?
well, now, suppose that one of your hands is hot and the other cold, and that they are both at once plunged into a bowl of water that has a temperature between the two. won't the water seem cold to one hand and warm to the other?

it will.
it will.

ought we not therefore, by your principles, to conclude it is really both cold and warm at the same time, that is, according to your own concession, to believe an absurdity?
then doesn't it follow by your principles that the water really is both cold and warm at the same time thus believing something that you agree to be an absurdity?

i confess it seems so.
i admit that that seems right.

consequently, the principles themselves are false, since you have granted that no true principle leads to an absurdity.
so the principles themselves are false, since you have admitted that no true principle leads to an absurdity.

but, after all, can anything be more absurd than to say, there is no heat in the fire?
but, after all, can anything be more absurd than to say that there is no heat in the fire?

to make the point still clearer; tell me whether, in two cases exactly alike, we ought not to make the same judgment?
to make the point still clearer, answer me this: in two cases that are exactly alike, oughtn't we to make the same judgment?

we ought.
we ought.

when a pin pricks your finger, doth it not rend and divide the fibres of your flesh? it doth. and when a coal burns your finger, doth it any more?
when a pin pricks your finger, doesn't it tear and divide the fibres of your flesh?

it doth not.
and when hot coal burns your finger, does it do any more?

since, therefore, you neither judge the sensation itself occasioned by the pin, nor anything like it to be in the pin; you should not, conformably to what you have now granted, judge the sensation occasioned by the fire, or anything like it, to be in the fire.
you hold that the pin itself doesn't contain either the sensation that it causes, or anything like it. so, given what you have just agreed to namely that like cases should be judged alike you ought to hold that the fire doesn't contain either the sensation that it causes or anything like it.

well, since it must be so, i am content to yield this point, and acknowledge that heat and cold are only sensations existing in our minds. but there still remain qualities enough to secure the reality of external things.
well, since it must be so, i am content to give up this point, and admit that heat and cold are only sensations existing in our minds. still, there are plenty of other qualities through which to secure the reality of external things.

but what will you say, hylas, if it shall appear that the case is the same with regard to all other sensible qualities, and that they can no more be supposed to exist without the mind, than heat and cold?
but what will you say, hylas, if it turns out that the same argument applies with regard to all other sensible qualities, and that none of them can be supposed to exist outside the mind, any more than heat and cold can?

let us examine them in order. what think you of tastes, do they exist without the mind, or no?
let us examine the other sensible qualities in order. what about tastes? do you think they exist outside the mind, or not?

can any man in his senses doubt whether sugar is sweet, or wormwood bitter?
can anyone in his right mind doubt that sugar is sweet, or that wormwood is bitter?

inform me, hylas. is a sweet taste a particular kind of pleasure or pleasant sensation, or is it not?
tell me, is a sweet taste a particular kind of pleasure or pleasant sensation, or is it not?

it is.
it is.

and is not bitterness some kind of uneasiness or pain?
and isn't bitterness some kind of discomfort or pain?

i grant it.
i grant that.

if therefore sugar and wormwood are unthinking corporeal substances existing without the mind, how can sweetness and bitterness, that is, pleasure and pain, agree to them?
if therefore sugar and wormwood are unthinking corporeal substances existing outside the mind, how can sweetness and bitterness that is, pleasure and pain be in them?

hold, philonous, i now see what it was delude time. you asked whether heat and cold, sweetness at were not particular sorts of pleasure and pain; to which simply, that they were. whereas i should have thus distinguished: those qualities, as perceived by us, are pleasures or pair existing in the external objects. we must not therefore conclude absolutely, that there is no heat in the fire, or sweetness in the sugar, but only that heat or sweetness, as perceived by us, are not in the fire or sugar. what say you to this?
hold on, philonous! now i see what has deluded me all this time. you asked whether heat and cold, sweetness and bitterness, are particular sorts of pleasure and pain; to which i answered simply that they are. i should have answered by making a distinction: those qualities as perceived by us are pleasures or pains, but as existing in the external objects they are not. so we cannot conclude without qualification that there is no heat in the fire or sweetness in the sugar, but only that heat or sweetness as perceived by us are not in the fire or the sugar. what do you say to this?

i say it is nothing to the purpose. our discourse proceeded altogether concerning sensible things, which you defined to be, the things we immediately perceive by our senses. whatever other qualities, therefore, you speak of as distinct from these, i know nothing of them, neither do they at all belong to the point in dispute. you may, indeed, pretend to have discovered certain qualities which you do not perceive, and assert those insensible qualities exist in fire and sugar. but what use can be made of this to your present purpose, i am at a loss to conceive. tell me then once more, do you acknowledge that heat and cold, sweetness and bitterness (meaning those qualities which are perceived by the senses), do not exist without the mind?
i say it is irrelevant. we were talking only about sensible things, which you defined as things we immediately perceive by our senses. whatever other qualities you are talking about have no place in our conversation, and i don't know anything about them. you may indeed claim to have discovered certain qualities that you don't perceive, and assert that they exist in fire and sugar; but i can't for the life of me see how that serves your side in the argument we were having. tell me then once more, do you agree that heat and cold, sweetness and bitterness (meaning the qualities that are perceived by the senses), don't exist outside the mind?

i see it is to no purpose to hold out, so i give up the cause as to those mentioned qualities. though i profess it sounds oddly, to say that sugar is not sweet.
i see it is no use holding out, so i give up the cause with respect to those four qualities. though i must say it sounds odd to say that sugar isn't sweet.

but, for your farther satisfaction, take this along with you: that which at other times seems sweet, shall, to a distempered palate, appear bitter. and, nothing can be plainer than that divers persons perceive different tastes in the same food; since that which one man delights in, another abhors. and how could this be, if the taste was something really inherent in the food?
it might sound better to you if you bear this in mind: someone whose palate is diseased may experience as bitter stuff that at other times seems sweet to him. and it's perfectly obvious that different people perceive different tastes in the same food, since what one man delights in another loathes. how could this be, if the taste were really inherent in the food?

i acknowledge i know not how.
i admit that i don't know how.

in the next place, odours are to be considered. and, with regard to these, i would fain know whether what hath been said of tastes doth not exactly agree to them? are they not so many pleasing or displeasing sensations?
now think about odours. don't they exactly fit what i have just been saying about tastes? aren't they just so many pleasing or displeasing sensations?

they are.
they are.

can you then conceive it possible that they should exist in an unperceiving thing?
then can you conceive it to be possible that they should exist in an unperceiving thing?

i cannot.
i cannot.

or, can you imagine that filth and ordure affect those brute animals that feed on them out of choice, with the same smells which we perceive in them?
or can you imagine that filth and excrement affect animals that choose to feed on them with the same smells that we perceive in them?

by no means.
by no means.

may we not therefore conclude of smells, as of the other forementioned qualities, that they cannot exist in any but a perceiving substance or mind?
then can't we conclude that smells, like the other qualities we have been discussing, cannot exist anywhere but in a perceiving substance or mind?

i think so.
i think so.

then as to sounds, what must we think of them: are they accidents really inherent in external bodies, or not?
what about sounds? are they qualities really inherent in external bodies, or not?

that they inhere not in the sonorous bodies is plain from hence: because a bell struck in the exhausted receiver of an air-pump sends forth no sound. the air, therefore, must be thought the subject of sound.
they don't inhere in the sounding bodies. we know this, because when a bell is struck in a vacuum, it sends out no sound. so the subject of sound must be the air.

what reason is there for that, hylas?
explain that, hylas.

because, when any motion is raised in the air, we perceive a sound greater or lesser, according to the air's motion; but without some motion in the air, we never hear any sound at all.
when the air is set into motion, we perceive a louder or softer sound in proportion to the air's motion; but when the air is still, we hear no sound at all.

and granting that we never hear a sound but when some motion is produced in the air, yet i do not see how you can infer from thence, that the sound itself is in the air.
granting that we never hear a sound except when some motion is produced in the air, i still don't see how you can infer from this that the sound itself is in the air.

it is this very motion in the external air that produces in the mind the sensation of sound. for, striking on the drum of the ear, it causeth a vibration, which by the auditory nerves being communicated to the brain, the soul is thereupon affected with the sensation called sound.
this motion in the external air is what produces in the mind the sensation of sound. by striking on the ear-drum it causes a vibration which is passed along the auditory nerves to the brain, whereon the mind experiences the sensation called sound.

what! is sound then a sensation?
what! is sound a sensation?

i tell you, as perceived by us, it is a particular sensation in the mind.
as i said: as perceived by us it is a particular sensation in the mind.

and can any sensation exist without the mind?
and can any sensation exist outside the mind?

no, certainly.
no, certainly.

how then can sound, being a sensation, exist in the air, if by the air you mean a senseless substance existing without the mind?
but if sound is a sensation, how can it exist in the air, if by the air you mean a senseless substance existing outside the mind?

you must distinguish, philonous, between sound as it is perceived by us, and as it is in itself; or (which is the same thing) between the sound we immediately perceive, and that which exists without us. the former, indeed, is a particular kind of sensation, but the latter is merely a vibrative or undulatory motion the air.
philonous, you must distinguish sound as it is perceived by us from sound as it is in itself; or in other words distinguish the sound we immediately perceive from the sound that exists outside us. the former is indeed a particular kind of sensation, but the latter is merely a vibration in the air.

i thought i had already obviated that distinction, by answer i gave when you were applying it in a like case before. but, to say no more of that, are you sure then that sound is really nothing but motion?
i thought i had already flattened that distinction by the answer i gave when you were applying it in a similar case before. but i'll let that pass. are you sure, then, that sound is really nothing but motion?

i am.
i am.

whatever therefore agrees to real sound, may with truth be attributed to motion?
whatever is true of real sound, therefore, can truthfully be said of motion.

it may.
it may.

it is then good sense to speak of motion as of a thing that is loud, sweet, acute, or grave.
so it makes sense to speak of motion as something that is loud, sweet, piercing, or low-pitched!

i see you are resolved not to understand me. is it not evident those accidents or modes belong only to sensible sound, or sound in the common acceptation of the word, but not to sound in the real and philosophic sense; which, as i just now told you, is nothing but a certain motion of the air?
i see you are determined not to understand me. isn't it obvious that those qualities belong only to sensible sound, or sound in the ordinary everyday meaning of the word, but not to sound in the real and scientific sense, which (as i have just explained) is nothing but a certain motion of the air?

it seems then there are two sorts of sound the one vulgar, or that which is heard, the other philosophical and real?
it seems, then, there are two sorts of sound the common everyday sort that we hear, and the scientific and real sort that we don't hear.

even so. and the latter consists in motion?
and the latter kind of sound consists in motion.

i told you so before.
as i told you.

tell me, hylas, to which of the senses, think you, the idea of motion belongs? to the hearing?
tell me, hylas, which of the senses do you think the idea of motion belongs to? the sense of hearing?

no, certainly; but to the sight and touch.
certainly not. to the senses of sight and touch.

it should follow then, that, according to you, real sounds may possibly be seen or felt, but never heard.
it should follow then, according to you, that real sounds may possibly be seen or felt, but can never be heard.

look you, philonous, you may, if you please, make a jest of my opinion, but that will not alter the truth of things. i own, indeed, the inferences you draw me into sound something oddly; but common language, you know, is framed by, and for the use of the vulgar: we must not therefore wonder if expressions adapted to exact philosophic notions seem uncouth and out of the way.
look, philonous, make fun of my views if you want to, but that won't alter the truth of things. i admit that the inferences you draw from them sound a little odd; but ordinary language is formed by ordinary people for their own use, so it's not surprising if statements that express exact scientific notions seem clumsy and strange.

is it come to that? i assure you, i imagine myself to have gained no small point, since you make so light of departing from common phrases and opinions; it being a main part of our inquiry, to examine whose notions are widest of the common road, and most repugnant to the general sense of the world. but, can you think it no more than a philosophical paradox, to say that real sounds are never heard, and that the idea of them is obtained by some other sense? and is there nothing in this contrary to nature and the truth of things?
is it come to that? i assure you, i think i have scored a pretty big win when you so casually depart from ordinary phrases and opinions; because what we were mainly arguing about was whose notions are furthest from the common road and most in conflict with what people in general think. your claim that real sounds are never heard, and that we get our idea of sound through some other sense can you think that this is merely an odd-sounding scientific truth? isn't something in it contrary to nature and the truth of things?

to deal ingenuously, i do not like it. and, after the concessions already made, i had as well grant that sounds too have no real being without the mind.
frankly, i don't like it either. given the concessions i have already made, i had better admit that sounds also have no real existence outside the mind.

and i hope you will make no difficulty to acknowledge the same of colours.
and i hope you won't stick at admitting the same of colours.

pardon me: the case of colours is very different. can anything be plainer than that we see them on the objects?
pardon me; the case of colours is very different. can anything be more obvious than the fact that we see colours on the objects?

the objects you speak of are, i suppose, corporeal substances existing without the mind?
the objects you speak of are, i suppose, corporeal substances existing outside the mind.

they are.
they are.

and have true and real colours inhering in them?
and they have true and real colours inhering in them?

each visible object hath that colour which we see in it.
each visible object has the colour that we see in it.

how! is there anything visible but what we perceive by sight?
hah! is there anything visible other than what we perceive by sight?

there is not.
there is not.

and, do we perceive anything by sense which we do not perceive immediately?
and do we perceive anything by our senses that we don't perceive immediately?

how often must i be obliged to repeat the same thing? i tell you, we do not.
how often do i have to say it? i tell you, we do not.

have patience, good hylas; and tell me once more, whether there is anything immediately perceived by the senses, except sensible qualities. i know you asserted there was not; but i would now be informed, whether you still persist in the same opinion.
bear with me, hylas, and tell me yet again whether anything is immediately perceived by the senses other than sensible qualities. i know you asserted that nothing is; but i want to know now whether you still think so.

i do.
i do.

pray, is your corporeal substance either a sensible quality, or made up of sensible qualities?
now, is your corporeal substance either a sensible quality or made up of sensible qualities?

what a question that is! who ever thought it was?
what a question to ask! who ever thought it was?

my reason for asking was, because in saying, each visible object hath that colour which we see in it, you make visible objects to be corporeal substances; which implies either that corporeal substances are sensible qualities, or else that there is something besides sensible qualities perceived by sight: but, as this point was formerly agreed between us, and is still maintained by you, it is a clear consequence, that your corporeal substance is nothing distinct from sensible qualities.
here is why i ask. when you say that each visible object has the colour that we see in it, you imply that either (1) visible objects are sensible qualities, or else (2) something other than sensible qualities can be perceived by sight. but we earlier agreed that (2) is false, and you still think it is; so we are left with the thesis (1) that visible objects are sensible qualities. now, in this conversation you have been taking it that visible objects are corporeal substances; and so we reach the conclusion that your corporeal substances are nothing but sensible qualities.

you may draw as many absurd consequences as you please, and endeavour to perplex the plainest things; but you shall never persuade me out of my senses. i clearly understand my own meaning.
you may draw as many absurd consequences as you please, and try to entangle the plainest things; but you will never persuade me out of my senses. i clearly understand my own meaning.

i wish you would make me understand it too. but, since you are unwilling to have your notion of corporeal substance examined, i shall urge that point no farther. only be pleased to let me know, whether the same colours which we see exist in external bodies, or some other.
i wish you would make me understand it too! but since you don't want me to look into your notion of corporeal substance, i shall drop that point. but please tell me whether the colours that we see are the very ones that exist in external bodies or some other colours. they are the very same ones.

what! are then the beautiful red and purple we see on yonder clouds really in them? or do you imagine they have in themselves any other form than that of a dark mist or vapour?
oh! then are the beautiful red and purple that we see on those clouds over there really in them? or do you rather think that the clouds in themselves are nothing but a dark mist or vapour?

i must own, philonous, those colours are not really in the clouds as they seem to be at this distance. they are only apparent colours.
i must admit, philonous, that those colours aren't really in the clouds as they seem to be at this distance. they are only apparent colours.

apparent call you them? how shall we distinguish these apparent colours from real?
apparent call you them? how are we to distinguish these apparent colours from real ones?

very easily. those are to be thought apparent which, appearing only at a distance, vanish upon a nearer approach.
very easily. when a colour appears only at a distance, and vanishes when one comes closer, it is merely apparent.

and those, i suppose, are to be thought real which are discovered by the most near and exact survey.
and i suppose that real colours are ones that are revealed by looking carefully from close up?

right.
right.

is the nearest and exactest survey made by the help of a microscope, or by the naked eye?
does the closest and most careful way of looking use a microscope, or only the naked eye?

by a microscope, doubtless.
a microscope, of course.

but a microscope often discovers colours in an object different from those perceived by the unassisted sight. and, in case we had microscopes magnifying to any assigned degree, it is certain that no object whatsoever, viewed through them, would appear in the same colour which it exhibits to the naked eye.
but a microscope often reveals colours in an object different from those perceived by unassisted sight. and if we had microscopes that could magnify to as much as we liked, it is certain that no object whatsoever when seen through them would appear with the same colour that it presents to the naked eye.

and what will you conclude from all this? you cannot argue that there are really and naturally no colours on objects: because by artificial managements they may be altered, or made to vanish.
well, what do you conclude from that? you can't argue that there are really and naturally no colours on objects, just because we can contrive artificial ways to alter them or make them vanish.

i think it may evidently be concluded from your own concessions, that all the colours we see with our naked eyes are only apparent as those on the clouds, since they vanish upon a more close and accurate inspection which is afforded us by a microscope. then as to what you say by way of prevention: i ask you whether the real and natural state of an object is better discovered by a very sharp and piercing sight, or by one which is less sharp?
it can obviously be inferred from your own concessions, i think, that all the colours we see with our naked eyes are only apparent like those on the clouds since they vanish when one looks more closely and accurately, as one can with a microscope. and to anticipate your next objection i ask you whether the real and natural state of an object is revealed better by a very sharp and piercing sight, or by one that is less sharp.

by the former without doubt.
by the former, without doubt.

is it not plain from dioptrics that microscopes make the sight more penetrating, and represent objects as they would appear to the eye in case it were naturally endowed with a most exquisite sharpness?
isn't it plain from the science of optics that microscopes make the sight more penetrating, and represent objects as they would appear to the eye if it were naturally endowed with extreme sharpness?

it is.
it is.

consequently the microscopical representation is to be thought that which best sets forth the real nature of the thing, or what it is in itself. the colours, therefore, by it perceived are more genuine and real than those perceived otherwise.
so the microscopic representation of a thing should be regarded as the one that best displays the thing's real nature, or what the thing is in itself. so the colours perceived through a microscope are more genuine and real than those perceived in any other way.

i confess there is something in what you say.
i admit that there's something in what you say.

besides, it is not only possible but manifest, that there actually are animals whose eyes are by nature framed to perceive those things which by reason of their minuteness escape our sight. what think you of those inconceivably small animals perceived by glasses? must we suppose they are all stark blind? or, in case they see, can it be imagined their sight hath not the same use in preserving their bodies from injuries, which appears in that of all other animals? and if it hath, is it not evident they must see particles less than their own bodies; which will present them with a far different view in each object from that which strikes our senses? even our own eyes do not always represent objects to us after the same manner. in the jaundice every one knows that all things seem yellow. is it not therefore highly probable those animals in whose eyes we discern a very different texture from that of ours, and whose bodies abound with different humours, do not see the same colours in every object that we do? from all which, should it not seem to follow that all colours are equally apparent, and that none of those which we perceive are really inherent in any outward object?
besides, it's not only possible but clearly true that there actually are animals whose eyes are naturally formed to perceive things that are too small for us to see. what do you think about those inconceivably small animals that we perceive through microscopes? must we suppose they are all totally blind? if they can see, don't we have to suppose that their sight has the same use in preserving their bodies from injuries as eyesight does in all other animals? if it does have that use, isn't it obvious that they must see particles that are smaller than their own bodies, which will present them with a vastly different view of each object from the view that strikes our senses? even our own eyes don't always represent objects to us in the same way. everyone knows that to someone suffering from jaundice all things seem yellow. so isn't it highly probable that animals whose eyes we see to be differently structured from ours, and whose bodily fluids are unlike ours, don't see the same colours as we do in every object? from all of this, shouldn't it seem to follow that all colours are equally apparent, and that none of the ones that we see are really in any outer object?

it should.
it should.

the point will be past all doubt, if you consider that, in case colours were real properties or affections inherent in external bodies, they could admit of no alteration without some change wrought in the very bodies themselves: but, is it not evident from what hath been said that, upon the use of microscopes, upon a change happening in the burnouts of the eye, or a variation of distance, without any manner of real alteration in the thing itself, the colours of any object are either changed, or totally disappear? nay, all other circumstances remaining the same, change but the situation of some objects, and they shall present different colours to the eye. the same thing happens upon viewing an object in various degrees of light. and what is more known than that the same bodies appear differently coloured by candle-light from what they do in the open day? add to these the experiment of a prism which, separating the heterogeneous rays of light, alters the colour of any object, and will cause the whitest to appear of a deep blue or red to the naked eye. and now tell me whether you are still of opinion that every body hath its true real colour inhering in it; and, if you think it hath, i would fain know farther from you, what certain distance and position of the object, what peculiar texture and formation of the eye, what degree or kind of light is necessary for ascertaining that true colour, and distinguishing it from apparent ones.
to put it past all doubt, consider the following. if colours were real properties or qualities inhering in external bodies, they couldn't be altered except by some alteration in the very bodies themselves: but isn't it evident that the colours of an object can be changed or made to disappear entirely through the use of a microscope, or some change in the fluids in the eye, or a change in the viewing distance, without any sort of real alteration in the thing itself? indeed, even when all the other factors remain unaltered some objects present different colours to the eye depending on the angle from which they are looked at. the same thing happens when we view an object in different brightnesses of light. and everyone knows that the same bodies appear differently coloured by candle-light from what they do in daylight. add to these facts our experience of a prism, which separates the different rays of light and thereby alters the colour of an object, causing the whitest object to appear deep blue or red to the naked eye. now tell me whether you still think that each body has its true, real colour inhering in it. if you think it has, i want to know what particular distance and orientation of the object, what special condition of the eye, what intensity or kind of light is needed for discovering that true colour and distinguishing it from the apparent ones.

i own myself entirely satisfied, that they are all equally apparent, and that there is no such thing as colour really inhering in external bodies, but that it is altogether in the light. and what confirms me in this opinion is, that in proportion to the light colours are still more or less vivid; and if there be no light, then are there no colours perceived. besides, allowing there are colours on external objects, yet, how is it possible for us to perceive them? for no external body affects the mind, unless it acts first on our organs of sense. but the only action of bodies is motion; and motion cannot be communicated otherwise than by impulse. a distant object therefore cannot act on the eye; nor consequently make itself or its properties perceivable to the soul. whence it plainly follows that it is immediately some contiguous substance, which, operating on the eye, occasions a perception of colours: and such is light.
i admit to being quite convinced that they are all equally apparent, that no such thing as colour really inheres in external bodies, and that colour is wholly in the light. what confirms me in this opinion is the fact that colours are more or less vivid depending on the brightness of the light, and that when there is no light no colours are seen. furthermore, if there were colours in external objects, how could we possibly perceive them? no external body affects the mind unless it acts first on our sense-organs; and the only action of bodies is motion, and this can't be communicated except in collisions. so a distant object can't act on the eye, and so can't enable itself or its properties to be perceived by the mind. from this it plainly follows that what immediately causes the perception of colours is some substance that is in contact with the eye such as light.

howl is light then a substance?
what? is light a substance?

section i.
section 1: the different kinds of philosophy

of the different species of philosophy.
moral philosophy, or the science of human nature, can be treated in two different ways, each of which has its own special merit and may contribute to the entertainment, instruction, and reformation of mankind.

moral philosophy, or the science of human nature, may be treated after two different manners; each of which has its peculiar merit, and may contribute to the entertainment, instruction, and reformation of mankind. the one considers man chiefly as born for action; and as influenced in his measures by taste and sentiment; pursuing one object, and avoiding another, according to the value which these objects seem to possess, and according to the light in which they present themselves. as virtue, of all objects, is allowed to be the most valuable, this species of philosophers paint her in the most amiable colours; borrowing all helps from poetry and eloquence, and treating their subject in an easy and obvious manner, and such as is best fitted to please the imagination, and engage the affections. they select the most striking observations and instances from common life; place opposite characters in a proper contrast; and alluring us into the paths of virtue by the views of glory and happiness, direct our steps in these paths by the soundest precepts and most illustrious examples. they make us  the difference between vice and virtue; they excite and regulate our sentiments; and so they can but bend our hearts to the love of probity and true honour, they think, that they have fully attained the end of all their labours.
one of the two treatments considers man chiefly as born for action, and as guided in his conduct by taste and sentiment, pursuing one object and avoiding another according to the value they seem to have and according to the light in which they are presented. as virtue is agreed to be the most valuable thing one could pursue, philosophers of this kind paint virtue in the most charming colours, getting help from poetry and eloquence and treating their subject in a popular and undemanding manner that is best fitted to please the reader's imagination and arouse his affections. they select the most striking observations and examples from common life; they set up proper contrasts between opposite characteristics such as virtue and vice, generosity and meanness; and, attracting us into the paths of virtue by visions of glory and happiness, they direct our steps in these paths by the soundest rules and the most vivid examples. they make us feel the difference between vice and virtue; they arouse and regulate our beliefs and feelings; and they think they have fully reached their goal if they manage to bend our hearts to the love of honesty and true honour.

the other species of philosophers consider man in the light of a reasonable rather than an active being, and endeavour to form his understanding more than cultivate his manners. they regard human nature as a subject of speculation; and with a narrow scrutiny examine it, in order to find those principles, which regulate our understanding, excite our sentiments, and make us approve or blame any particular object, action, or behaviour. they think it a reproach to all literature, that philosophy should not yet have fixed, beyond controversy, the foundation of morals, reasoning, and criticism; and should for ever talk of truth and falsehood, vice and virtue, beauty and deformity, without being able to determine the source of these distinctions. while they attempt this arduous task, they are deterred by no difficulties; but proceeding from particular instances to general principles, they still push on their enquiries to principles more general, and rest not satisfied till they arrive at those original principles, by which, in every science, all human curiosity must be bounded. though their speculations seem abstract, and even unintelligible to common readers, they aim at the approbation of the learned and the wise; and think themselves sufficiently compensated for the labour of their whole lives, if they can discover some hidden truths, which may contribute to the instruction of posterity.
philosophers who do moral philosophy in the second way focus on man as a reasonable rather than as an active being, and try to shape his thinking more than to improve his behaviour. they regard human nature as a subject of theoretical enquiry, and they examine it intently, trying to find the principles that regulate our understanding, stir up our sentiments, and make us approve or blame this or that particular object, event, or action. they think it somewhat disgraceful that philosophy hasn't yet established an agreed account of the foundation of morals, reasoning, and artistic criticism; and that it goes on talking about truth and falsehood, vice and virtue, beauty and ugliness, without being able to fix the source of these distinctions. while they attempt this hard task, no difficulties deter them; moving from particular instances to general principles, they then push their enquiries still further, to get to principles that are even more general, and they don't stop, satisfied, until they arrive at the basic principles that set the limits to human curiosity in every branch of knowledge. though their speculations seem abstract, and even unintelligible to ordinary readers, they aim at getting the approval of the learned and the wise; and think themselves well enough compensated for their lifetime's work if they can bring out into the open some hidden truths that may be good for later generations to know.

it is certain that the easy and obvious philosophy will always, with the generality of mankind, have the preference above the accurate and abstruse; and by many will be recommended, not only as more agreeable, but more useful than the other. it enters more into common life; moulds the heart and affections; and, by touching those principles which actuate men, reforms their conduct, and brings them nearer to that model of perfection which it describes. on the contrary, the abstruse philosophy, being founded on a turn of mind, which cannot enter into business and action, vanishes when the philosopher leaves the shade, and comes into open day; nor can its principles easily retain any influence over our conduct and behaviour. the feelings of our heart, the agitation of our passions, the vehemence of our affections, dissipate all its conclusions, and reduce the profound philosopher to a mere plebeian.
the general run of people will certainly always prefer the relaxed and obvious kind of philosophy to the accurate and abstruse kind; and many will recommend the former as being not only the more agreeable of the two kinds but also the more useful. it enters more into common life; moulds the heart and affections; and because it involves principles on which people act, it reforms their conduct and brings them nearer to the model of perfection that it describes. the abstruse philosophy, on the other hand, is based on a mental attitude that cannot enter into every-day business and action; so it vanishes when the philosopher comes out of the shadows into daylight, and its principles can't easily influence our behaviour. the feelings of our heart, the agitation of our passions, the intensity of our affections, scatter all its conclusions and reduce the profound philosopher to a mere peasant.

this also must be confessed, that the most durable, as well as justest fame, has been acquired by the easy philosophy, and that abstract reasoners seem hitherto to have enjoyed only a momentary reputation, from the caprice or ignorance of their own age, but have not been able to support their renown with more equitable posterity. it is easy for a profound philosopher to commit a mistake in his subtile reasonings; and one mistake is the necessary parent of another, while he pushes on his consequences, and is not deterred from embracing any conclusion, by its unusual appearance, or its contradiction to popular opinion. but a philosopher, who purposes only to represent the common sense of mankind in more beautiful and more engaging colours, if by accident he falls into error, goes no farther; but renewing his appeal to common sense, and the natural sentiments of the mind, returns into the right path, and secures himself from any dangerous illusions. the fame of cicero flourishes at present; but that of aristotle is utterly decayed. la bruyere passes the seas, and still maintains his reputation: but the glory of malebranche is confined to his own nation, and to his own age. and addison, perhaps, will be read with pleasure, when locke shall be entirely forgotten.
the easy philosophy let us face the fact has achieved more lasting fame than the other, and rightly so. abstract reasoners have sometimes enjoyed a momentary reputation, because they caught the fancy of their contemporaries or because the latter were ignorant of what they were doing; but they haven't been able to maintain their high standing with later generations that weren't biased in their favour. it is easy for a profound abstract philosopher to make a mistake in his intricate reasonings; and one mistake is bound to lead to another, while the philosopher drives his argument forward and isn't deterred from accepting any conclusion by its sounding strange or clashing with popular opinion. not so with a philosopher who aims only to represent the common sense of mankind in more beautiful and more attractive colours: if by accident he falls into error, he goes no further. rather than pushing on, he renews his appeal to common sense and to the natural sentiments of the mind, gets back onto the right path, and protects himself from any dangerous illusions. the fame of cicero flourishes at present; but that of aristotle is utterly decayed. la bruyere is read in many lands and still maintains his reputation: but the glory of malebranche is confined to his own nation, and to his own time. and addison, perhaps, will be read with pleasure when locke has been entirely forgotten.

the mere philosopher is a character, which is commonly but little acceptable in the world, as being supposed to contribute nothing either to the advantage or pleasure of society; while he lives remote from communication with mankind, and is wrapped up in principles and notions equally remote from their comprehension. on the other hand, the mere ignorant is still more despised; nor is any thing deemed a surer sign of an illiberal genius in an age and nation where the sciences flourish, than to be entirely destitute of all relish for those noble entertainments. the most perfect character is supposed to lie between those extremes; retaining an equal ability and taste for books, company, and business; preserving in conversation that discernment and delicacy which arise from polite letters; and in business, that probity and accuracy which are the natural result of a just philosophy. in order to diffuse and cultivate so accomplished a character, nothing can be more useful than compositions of the easy style and manner, which draw not too much from life, require no deep application or retreat to be comprehended, and send back the student among mankind full of noble sentiments and wise precepts, applicable to every exigence of human life. by means of such compositions, virtue becomes amiable, science agreeable, company instructive, and retirement entertaining.
to be a mere philosopher is usually not thought well of in the world, because such a person is thought to contribute nothing either to the advantage or to the pleasure of society, to live remote from communication with mankind, and to be wrapped up in principles and notions that they can't possibly understand. on the other hand, the mere ignoramus is still more despised; and at a time and place where learning flourishes, nothing is regarded as a surer sign of an ill-bred cast of mind than having no taste at all for learning. the best kind of character is supposed to lie between those extremes: retaining an equal ability and taste for books, company, and business; preserving in conversation that discernment and delicacy that arise from literary pursuits, and in business preserving the honesty and accuracy that are the natural result of a sound philosophy. in order to spread and develop such an accomplished kind of character, nothing can be more useful than writings in the easy style and manner, which stay close to life, require no deep thought or solitary pondering to be understood, and send the reader back among mankind full of noble sentiments and wise precepts, applicable to every demand of human life. by means of such writings, virtue becomes lovable, the pursuit of knowledge agreeable, company instructive, and solitude entertaining.

man is a reasonable being; and as such, receives from science his proper food and nourishment: but so narrow are the bounds of human understanding, that little satisfaction can be hoped for in this particular, either from the extent of security or his acquisitions. man is a sociable, no less than a reasonable being: but neither can he always enjoy company agreeable and amusing, or preserve the proper relish for them. man is also an active being; and from that disposition, as well as from the various necessities of human life, must submit to business and occupation: but the mind requires some relaxation, and cannot always support its bent to care and industry. it seems, then, that nature has pointed out a mixed kind of life as most suitable to the human race, and secretly admonished them to allow none of these biasses to  too much, so as to incapacitate them for other occupations and entertainments. indulge your passion for science, says she, but let your science be human, and such as may have a direct reference to action and society. abstruse thought and profound researches i prohibit, and will severely punish, by the pensive melancholy which they introduce, by the endless uncertainty in which they involve you, and by the cold reception which your pretended discoveries shall meet with, when communicated. be a philosopher; but, amidst all your philosophy, be still a man.
man is a reasonable being, and as such he gets appropriate food and nourishment from the pursuit of knowledge; but so narrow are the limits of human understanding that we can't hope for any great amount of knowledge or for much security in respect of what we do know. as well as being reasonable, man is a sociable being; but he can't always enjoy indeed can't always want agreeable and amusing company. man is also an active being; and from that disposition of his, as well as from the various necessities of human life, he must put up with being busy at something; but the mind requires some relaxation, and can't always devote itself to careful work. it seems, then, that nature has pointed out a mixed kind of life as most suitable for the human race, and has secretly warned us not to tilt too far in any of these directions and make ourselves incapable of other occupations and entertainments. indulge your passion for knowledge, says nature, but seek knowledge of things that are human and directly relevant to action and society. as for abstruse thought and profound researches, i prohibit them, and if you engage in them i will severely punish you by the brooding melancholy they bring, by the endless uncertainty in which they involve you, and by the cold reception your announced discoveries will meet with when you publish them. be a philosopher, but amidst all your philosophy be still a man.

were the generality of mankind contented to prefer the easy philosophy to the abstract and profound, without throwing any blame or contempt on the latter, it might not be improper, perhaps, to comply with this general opinion, and allow every man to enjoy, without opposition, his own taste and sentiment. but as the matter is often carried farther, even to the absolute rejecting of all profound reasonings, or what is commonly called , we shall now proceed to consider what can reasonably be pleaded in their behalf.
if people in general were contented to prefer the easy philosophy to the abstract and profound one, without throwing blame or contempt on the latter, it might be appropriate to go along with this general opinion, and to allow every man to enjoy without opposition his own taste and sentiment. but the friends of the easy philosophy often carry the matter further, even to point of absolutely rejecting all profound reasonings, or what is commonly called metaphysics; and this rejection should not be allowed to pass unchallenged. so i shall now proceed to consider what can reasonably be pleaded on behalf of the abstract kind of philosophy.

we may begin with observing, that one considerable advantage, which results from the accurate and abstract philosophy, is, its subserviency to the easy and humane; which, without the former, can never attain a sufficient degree of exactness in its sentiments, precepts, or reasonings. all polite letters are nothing but pictures of human life in various attitudes and situations; and inspire us with different sentiments, of praise or blame, admiration or ridicule, according to the qualities of the object, which they set before us. an artist must be better qualified to succeed in this undertaking, who, besides a delicate taste and a quick apprehension, possesses an accurate knowledge of the internal fabric, the operations of the understanding, the workings of the passions, and the various species of sentiment which discriminate vice and virtue. how painful soever this inward search or enquiry may appear, it becomes, in some measure, requisite to those, who would describe with success the obvious and outward appearances of life and manners. the anatomist presents to the eye the most hideous and disagreeable objects; but his science is useful to the painter in delineating even a venus or an helen. while the latter employs all the richest colours of his art, and gives his figures the most graceful and engaging airs; he must still carry his attention to the inward structure of the human body, the position of the muscles, the fabric of the bones, and the use and figure of every part or organ. accuracy is, in every case, advantageous to beauty, and just reasoning to delicate sentiment. in vain would we exalt the one by depreciating the other.
let us first observe that the accurate and abstract kind of philosophy has one considerable advantage that comes from its being of service to the other kind. without help from abstract philosophy, the easy and human kind can never be exact enough in its sentiments, rules, or reasonings. all literature is nothing but pictures of human life in various attitudes and situations, and these inspire us with different sentiments of praise or blame, admiration or ridicule, according to the qualities of the object they set before us. an artist must be better qualified to succeed in presenting such pictures if, in addition to delicate taste and sensitive uptake, he has an accurate knowledge of the internal structure and operations of the understanding, the workings of the passions, and the various kinds of sentiment that discriminate vice and virtue. however difficult this search into men's interiors may appear to be, it is to some extent needed by anyone wanting to describe successfully the obvious and outward aspects of life and manners. the anatomist presents to the eye the most hideous and disagreeable objects; but his science is useful to the painter in presenting even a venus or a helen. while the painter employs all the richest colours of his art, and gives his figures the most graceful and engaging airs, he still has to attend to the inward structure of the human body, the position of the muscles, the structure of the bones, and the function and shape of every bodily part or organ. accuracy always helps beauty, and solid reasoning always helps delicate sentiment. it would be pointless to praise one by depreciating the other.

besides, we may observe, in every art or profession, even those which most concern life or action, that a spirit of accuracy, however acquired, carries all of them nearer their perfection, and renders them more subservient to the interests of society. and though a philosopher may live remote from business, the genius of philosophy, if carefully cultivated by several, must gradually diffuse itself throughout the whole society, and bestow a similar correctness on every art and calling. the politician will acquire greater foresight and subtility, in the subdividing and balancing of power; the lawyer more method and finer principles in his reasonings; and the general more regularity in his discipline, and more caution in his plans and operations. the stability of modern governments above the ancient, and the accuracy of modern philosophy, have improved, and probably will still improve, by similar gradations.
besides, it is notable that in every art or profession, even those of the most practical sort, a spirit of accuracy (however acquired) makes for greater perfection and renders the activity more serviceable to the interests of society. and even if philosophers keep themselves far from the world of business and affairs, the spirit of philosophy, if carefully cultivated by a number of people, must gradually permeate the whole society and bring philosophical standards of correctness to every art and calling. the politician will acquire greater foresight and subtlety in apportioning and balancing power; the lawyer more method and finer principles in his reasonings; and the army general more regularity in his discipline, and more caution in his plans and operations. the growing stability of modern governments, compared with the ancient, has been accompanied by improvements in the accuracy of modern philosophy, and will probably continue to do so.

were there no advantage to be reaped from these studies, beyond the gratification of an innocent curiosity, yet ought not even this to be despised; as being one accession to those few safe and harmless pleasures, which are bestowed on human race. the sweetest and most inoffensive path of life leads through the avenues of science and learning; and whoever can either remove any obstructions in this way, or open up any new prospect, ought so far to be esteemed a benefactor to mankind. and though these researches may appear painful and fatiguing, it is with some minds as with some bodies, which being endowed with vigorous and florid health, require severe exercise, and reap a pleasure from what, to the generality of mankind, may seem burdensome and laborious. obscurity, indeed, is painful to the mind as well as to the eye; but to bring light from obscurity, by whatever labour, must needs be delightful and rejoicing.
even if these studies brought no advantage beyond gratifying innocent curiosity, that oughtn't to be despised, for it's one way of getting safe and harmless pleasures few of which have been bestowed on human race. the sweetest and most inoffensive path of life leads through the avenues of knowledge and learning; and anyone who can either remove any obstacles along the path or open up new views ought to that extent to be regarded as a benefactor to mankind. and though these accurate and abstract researches may appear difficult and fatiguing, some minds are like some bodies in this: being endowed with vigorous and flourishing health, they need severe exercise, and get pleasure from activities that most people would find burdensome and laborious. obscurity, indeed, is painful to the mind as well as to the eye; but to bring light from obscurity is bound to be delightful and rejoicing, however hard the labour.

but this obscurity in the profound and abstract philosophy, is objected to, not only as painful and fatiguing, but as the inevitable source of uncertainty and error. here indeed lies the justest and most plausible objection against a considerable part of metaphysics, that they are not properly a science; but arise either from the fruitless efforts of human vanity, which would penetrate into subjects utterly inaccessible to the understanding, or from the craft of popular superstitions, which, being unable to defend themselves on fair ground, raise these intangling brambles to cover and protect their weakness. chaced from the open country, these robbers fly into the forest, and lie in wait to break in upon every unguarded avenue of the mind, and overwhelm it with religious fears and prejudices. the stoutest antagonist, if he remit his watch a moment, is oppressed. and many, through cowardice and folly, open the gates to the enemies, and willingly receive them with reverence and submission, as their legal sovereigns.
but this obscurity in the profound and abstract kind of philosophy is objected to, not only as painful and tiring, but also as the inevitable source of uncertainty and error. here indeed lies the fairest and most plausible objection to a large part of metaphysics, that it isn't properly a science, but arises either from the fruitless efforts of human vanity, trying to penetrate into subjects that are utterly inaccessible to the understanding, or from the craft of popular superstitions which, being unable to defend themselves by fair arguments, raise these entangling metaphysical brambles to cover and protect their weakness. each of these is sometimes true; and the misuse of metaphysics by the friends of popular superstition is vexatious. chased from the open country, these robbers run into the forest and lie in wait to break in on every unguarded avenue of the mind and overwhelm it with religious fears and prejudices. they can oppress the strongest and most determined opponent if he lets up his guard for a moment. and many of their opponents, through cowardice and folly, open the gates to the enemies the purveyors of superstition and willingly and reverently submit to them as their legal sovereigns.

but is this a sufficient reason, why philosophers should desist from such researches, and leave superstition still in possession of her retreat? is it not proper to draw an opposite conclusion, and perceive the necessity of carrying the war into the most secret recesses of the enemy? in vain do we hope, that men, from frequent disappointment, will at last abandon such airy sciences, and discover the proper province of human reason. for, besides, that many persons find too sensible an interest in perpetually recalling such topics; besides this, i say, the motive of blind despair can never reasonably have place in the sciences; since, however unsuccessful former attempts may have proved, there is still room to hope, that the industry, good fortune, or improved sagacity of succeeding generations may reach discoveries unknown to former ages. each adventurous genius will still leap at the arduous prize, and find himself stimulated, rather that discouraged, by the failures of his predecessors; while he hopes that the glory of achieving so hard an adventure is reserved for him alone. the only method of freeing learning, at once, from these abstruse questions, is to enquire seriously into the nature of human understanding, and show, from an exact analysis of its powers and capacity, that it is by no means fitted for such remote and abstruse subjects. we must submit to this fatigue, in order to live at ease ever after: and must cultivate true metaphysics with some care, in order to destroy the false and adulterate. indolence, which, to some persons, affords a safeguard against this deceitful philosophy, is, with others, overbalanced by curiosity; and despair, which, at some moments, prevails, may give place afterwards to sanguine hopes and expectations. accurate and just reasoning is the only catholic remedy, fitted for all persons and all dispositions; and is alone able to subvert that abstruse philosophy and metaphysical jargon, which, being mixed up with popular superstition, renders it in a manner impenetrable to careless reasoners, and gives it the air of science and wisdom.
but is this a good enough reason for philosophers to hold back from such researches, to retreat and leave superstition in possession of the field? isn't it proper to draw the opposite conclusion, and see the necessity of carrying the war into the most secret recesses of the enemy? it is no use hoping that frequent disappointment will eventually lead men to abandon such airy pursuits as the superstitious ones, and discover the proper province of human reason. for one thing, many people find it too obviously to their advantage to be perpetually recalling such topics; and furthermore the motive of blind despair should never operate in the pursuit of knowledge, for however unsuccessful former attempts may have proved there is always room to hope that the hard work, good luck, or improved intelligence of succeeding generations will reach discoveries that were unknown in former ages. each adventurous thinker will still leap at the elusive prize, and find himself stimulated rather than discouraged by the failures of his predecessors; while he hopes that the glory of succeeding in such a hard adventure is reserved for him alone. so the friends of superstition and bad philosophy will never just give up. the only way to free learning from entanglement in these abstruse questions is to enquire seriously into the nature of human understanding, and through an exact analysis of its powers and capacity show that it's utterly unfitted for such remote and abstruse subjects. we must submit to this hard work in order to live at ease ever after; and we must cultivate true metaphysics carefully, in order to destroy metaphysics of the false and adulterated kind. laziness protects some people from this deceitful philosophy, but others are carried into it by curiosity; and despair, which at some moments prevails, may give place later to optimistic hopes and expectations. accurate and valid reasoning is the only universal remedy, fitted for all people of all kinds lazy and curious, despairing and hopeful and it alone can undercut that abstruse philosophy and metaphysical jargon that gets mixed up with popular superstition, presenting the latter in a manner that casual reasoners can't understand, and giving it the air of real knowledge and wisdom.

besides this advantage of rejecting, after deliberate enquiry, the most uncertain and disagreeable part of learning, there are many positive advantages, which result from an accurate scrutiny into the powers and faculties of human nature. it is remarkable concerning the operations of the mind, that, though most intimately present to us, yet, whenever they become the object of reflexion, they seem involved in obscurity; nor can the eye readily find those lines and boundaries, which discriminate and distinguish them. the objects are too fine to remain long in the same aspect or situation; and must be apprehended in an instant, by a superior penetration, derived from nature, and improved by habit and reflexion. it becomes, therefore, no inconsiderable part of science barely to know the different operations of the mind, to separate them from each other, to class them under their proper heads, and to correct all that seeming disorder, in which they lie involved, when made the object of reflexion and enquiry. this talk of ordering and distinguishing, which has no merit, when performed with regard to external bodies, the objects of our senses, rises in its value, when directed towards the operations of the mind, in proportion to the difficulty and labour, which we meet with in performing it. and if we can go no farther than this mental geography, or delineation of the distinct parts and powers of the mind, it is at least a satisfaction to go so far; and the more obvious this science may appear (and it is by no means obvious) the more contemptible still must the ignorance of it be esteemed, in all pretenders to learning and philosophy.
so an accurate scrutiny of the powers and faculties of human nature helps us to reject, after careful enquiry, the most uncertain and disagreeable part of learning; and it also brings many positive advantages. it is a remarkable fact about the operations of the mind that, although they are most intimately present to us, whenever we try to reflect on them they seem to be wrapped in darkness, and the eye of the mind can't easily detect the lines and boundaries that distinguish them from one another. the objects of this scrutiny i.e. the operations of the mind are so rarefied that they keep changing; so they have to be grasped in an instant, which requires great sharpness of mind, derived from nature and improved by habitual use. so it comes about that in the pursuit of knowledge a considerable part of the task is simply to know the different operations of the mind, to separate them from each other, to classify them properly, and to correct all the seeming disorder in which they lie when we reflect on them. this task of ordering and distinguishing has no merit when it's performed on external bodies, the objects of our senses; but when it's directed towards the operations of the mind it is valuable in proportion to how hard it is to do. even if we get no further than this mental geography, this marking out of the distinct parts and powers of the mind, it's at least a satisfaction to go that far; and the more obvious these results may appear (and they are by no means obvious), the more disgraceful it must be for those who lay claim to learning and philosophy to be ignorant of them.

nor can there remain any suspicion, that this science is uncertain and chimerical; unless we should entertain such a scepticism as is entirely subversive of all speculation, and even action. it cannot be doubted, that the mind is endowed with several powers and faculties, that these powers are distinct from each other, that what is really distinct to the immediate perception may be distinguished by reflexion; and consequently, that there is a truth and falsehood in all propositions on this subject, and a truth and falsehood, which lie not beyond the compass of human understanding. there are many obvious distinctions of this kind, such as those between the will and understanding, the imagination and passions, which fall within the comprehension of every human creature; and the finer and more philosophical distinctions are no less real and certain, though more difficult to be comprehended. some instances, especially late ones, of success in these enquiries, may give us a juster notion of the certainty and solidity of this branch of learning. and shall we esteem it worthy the labour of a philosopher to give us a true system of the planets, and adjust the position and order of those remote bodies; while we affect to overlook those, who, with so much success, delineate the parts of the mind, in which we are so intimately concerned?
nor can there remain any suspicion that this branch of knowledge the pursuit of accurate and abstract philosophy is uncertain and illusory, unless we adopt a scepticism that is entirely subversive of all theoretical enquiry, and even of all action. it can't be doubted that the mind is endowed with various powers and faculties, that these are distinct from each other, that what is really distinct to the immediate perception may be distinguished by reflection; and consequently that in all propositions on this subject there are true ones and false ones, and sorting them out lies within the reach of human understanding. there are many obvious distinctions of this kind, such as those between the will and understanding, the imagination and the passions, which every human creature can grasp; and the finer and more philosophical distinctions are no less real and certain, though they are harder to grasp. some successes in these enquiries, especially some recent ones, can give us a better idea of the certainty and solidity of this branch of learning. will we think it worth the effort of an astronomer to give us a true system of the planets, and to determine the position and order of those remote bodies, while we turn our noses up at those who with so much success determine the parts of the mind a topic which for us comes very close to home?

but may we not hope, that philosophy, if cultivated with care, and encouraged by the attention of the public, may carry its researches still farther, and discover, at least in some degree, the secret springs and principles, by which the human mind is actuated in its operations? astronomers had long contented themselves with proving, from the phaenomena, the true motions, order, and magnitude of the heavenly bodies: till a philosopher, at last, arose, who seems, from the happiest reasoning, to have also determined the laws and forces, by which the revolutions of the planets are governed and directed. the like has been performed with regard to other parts of nature. and there is no reason to despair of equal success in our enquiries concerning the mental powers and economy, if prosecuted with equal capacity and caution. it is probable, that one operation and principle of the mind depends on another; which, again, may be resolved into one more general and universal: and how far these researches may possibly be carried, it will be difficult for us, before, or even after, a careful trial, exactly to determine. this is certain, that attempts of this kind are every day made even by those who philosophize the most negligently: and nothing can be more requisite than to enter upon the enterprize with thorough care and attention; that, if it lie within the compass of human understanding, it may at last be happily achieved; if not, it may, however, be rejected with some confidence and security. this last conclusion, surely, is not desirable; nor ought it to be embraced too rashly. for how much must we diminish from the beauty and value of this species of philosophy, upon such a supposition? moralists have hitherto been accustomed, when they considered the vast multitude and diversity of those actions that excite our approbation or dislike, to search for some common principle, on which this variety of sentiments might depend. and though they have sometimes carried the matter too far, by their passion for some one general principle; it must, however, be confessed, that they are excusable in expecting to find some general principles, into which all the vices and virtues were justly to be resolved. the like has been the endeavour of critics, logicians, and even politicians: nor have their attempts been wholly unsuccessful; though perhaps longer time, greater accuracy, and more ardent application may bring these sciences still nearer their perfection. to throw up at once all pretensions of this kind may justly be deemed more rash, precipitate, and dogmatical, than even the boldest and most affirmative philosophy, that has ever attempted to impose its crude dictates and principles on mankind.
but may we not hope that philosophy, if carried out with care and encouraged by the attention of the public, may carry its researches still further? might it not get beyond the task of distinguishing and sorting out the operations of the mind, and discover, at least in some degree, the secret springs and drivers by which the human mind is actuated in its operations? astronomers were for a long time contented with proving, from the phenomena, the true motions, order, and size of the heavenly bodies; until at last a scientist, isaac newton, came along and also determined the laws and forces by which the revolutions of the planets are governed and directed. similar things have been done with regard to other parts of nature. and there is no reason to despair of equal success in our enquiries into the powers and organisation of the mind, if we carry them out as ably and alertly as those other scientists did their work. it is probable that one operation and principle of the mind depends on another; which may in turn be brought under a still more general and universal one; and it will be difficult for us to determine exactly how far these researches can be carried difficult before we have carefully tried, and difficult even after. this much is certain: attempts of this kind are made every day even by those who philosophize the most carelessly; and the greatest need is to embark on the project with thorough care and attention. that is needed so that if the task does lie within reach of human understanding, it can eventually end in success; and if it doesn't, it can be rejected with some confidence and security. but this last conclusion is not desirable, and shouldn't be arrived at rashly, for it detracts from the beauty and value of this sort of philosophy. moralists have always been accustomed, when they considered the vast number and variety of actions that arouse our approval or dislike, to search for some common principle on which this variety of sentiments might depend. and though their passion for a single general principle has sometimes carried them too far, it must be granted that they are excusable in expecting to find some general principles under which all the vices and virtues can rightly be brought. similar attempts have been made by literary critics, logicians, and even students of politics; and their attempts have met with some success, though these studies may come even nearer to perfection when they have been given more time, greater accuracy, and more intensive study. to throw up at once all claims to this kind of knowledge can fairly be thought to be more rash, precipitate, and dogmatic than even the boldest and most affirmative philosophy that has ever attempted to impose its crude dictates and principles on mankind.

what though these reasonings concerning human nature seem abstract, and of difficult comprehension? this affords no presumption of their falsehood. on the contrary, it seems impossible, that what has hitherto escaped so many wise and profound philosophers can be very obvious and easy. and whatever pains these researches may cost us, we may think ourselves sufficiently rewarded, not only in point of profit but of pleasure, if, by that means, we can make any addition to our stock of knowledge, in subjects of such unspeakable importance.
if these reasonings concerning human nature seem abstract and hard to understand, what of it? this isn't evidence of their falsehood. on the contrary, it seems impossible that what has hitherto escaped so many wise and profound philosophers can be very obvious and easy to discover. and whatever efforts these researches may cost us, we can think ourselves sufficiently rewarded not only in profit but also in pleasure, if by that means we can add at all to our stock of knowledge in subjects of such enormous importance.

but as, after all, the abstractedness of these speculations is no recommendation, but rather a disadvantage to them, and as this difficulty may perhaps be surmounted by care and art, and the avoiding of all unnecessary detail, we have, in the following enquiry, attempted to throw some light upon subjects, from which uncertainty has hitherto deterred the wise, and obscurity the ignorant. happy, if we can unite the boundaries of the different species of philosophy, by reconciling profound enquiry with clearness, and truth with novelty! and still more happy, if, reasoning in this easy manner, we can undermine the foundations of an abstruse philosophy, which seems to have hitherto served only as a shelter to superstition, and a cover to absurdity and error!
still, the abstract nature of these speculations is a drawback rather than an advantage; but perhaps this difficulty can be overcome by care and skill and the avoidance of all unnecessary detail; so in the following enquiry i shall try to throw some light on subjects from which wise people have been deterred by uncertainty, and ignorant people have been deterred by obscurity. how good it would be to be able to unite the boundaries of the different kinds of philosophy, by reconciling profound enquiry with clearness, and truth with novelty! and still better if by reasoning in this easy manner i can undermine the foundations of an abstruse philosophy that seems always to have served only as a shelter to superstition and a cover to absurdity and error!

section ii. of the origin of ideas.
section 2: the origin of ideas

every one will readily allow, that there is a considerable difference between the perceptions of the mind, when a man feels the pain of excessive heat, or the pleasure of moderate warmth, and when he afterwards recalls to his memory this sensation, or anticipates it by his imagination. these faculties may mimic or copy the perceptions of the senses; but they never can entirely reach the force and vivacity of the original sentiment. the utmost we say of them, even when they operate with greatest vigour, is, that they represent their object in so lively a manner, that we could  say we feel or see it: but, except the mind be disordered by disease or madness, they never can arrive at such a pitch of vivacity, as to render these perceptions altogether undistinguishable. all the colours of poetry, however splendid, can never paint natural objects in such a manner as to make the description be taken for a real landskip. the most lively thought is still inferior to the dullest sensation.
everyone will freely admit that the perceptions of the mind when a man feels the pain of excessive heat or the pleasure of moderate warmth are considerably unlike what he feels when he later remembers this sensation or earlier looks forward to it in his imagination. memory and imagination may mimic or copy the perceptions of the senses, but they can't create a perception that has as much force and liveliness as the one they are copying. even when they operate with greatest vigour, the most we will say is that they represent their object so vividly that we could almost say we feel or see it. except when the mind is out of order because of disease or madness, memory and imagination can never be so lively as to create perceptions that are indistinguishable from the ones we have in seeing or feeling. the most lively thought is still dimmer than the dullest sensation.

we may observe a like distinction to run through all the other perceptions of the mind. a man in a fit of anger, is actuated in a very different manner from one who only thinks of that emotion. if you tell me, that any person is in love, i easily understand your meaning, and form a just conception of his situation; but never can mistake that conception for the real disorders and agitations of the passion. when we reflect on our past sentiments and affections, our thought is a faithful mirror, and copies its objects truly; but the colours which it employs are faint and dull, in comparison of those in which our original perceptions were clothed. it requires no nice discernment or metaphysical head to mark the distinction between them.
a similar distinction runs through all the other perceptions of the mind. a real fit of anger is very different from merely thinking of that emotion. if you tell me that someone is in love, i understand your meaning and form a correct conception of the state he is in; but i would never mistake that conception for the turmoil of actually being in love! when we think back on our past sensations and feelings, our thought is a faithful mirror that copies its objects truly; but it does so in colours that are fainter and more washed-out than those in which our original perceptions were clothed. to tell one from the other you don't need careful thought or philosophical ability.

here therefore we may divide all the perceptions of the mind into two classes or species, which are distinguished by their different degrees of force and vivacity. the less forcible and lively are commonly denominated , then, i mean all our more lively perceptions, when we hear, or see, or feel, or love, or hate, or desire, or will. and impressions are distinguished from ideas, which are the less lively perceptions, of which we are conscious, when we reflect on any of those sensations or movements above mentioned.
so we can divide the mind's perceptions into two classes, on the basis of their different degrees of force and liveliness. the less forcible and lively are commonly called thoughts or ideas. the others have no name in our language or in most others, presumably because we don't need a general label for them except when we are doing philosophy. let us, then, take the liberty of calling them impressions, using that word in a slightly unusual sense. by the term impression, then, i mean all our more lively perceptions when we hear or see or feel or love or hate or desire or will. these are to be distinguished from ideas, which are the fainter perceptions of which we are conscious when we reflect on our impressions.

nothing, at first view, may seem more unbounded than the thought of man, which not only escapes all human power and authority, but is not even restrained within the limits of nature and reality. to form monsters, and join incongruous shapes and appearances, costs the imagination no more trouble than to conceive the most natural and familiar objects. and while the body is confined to one planet, along which it creeps with pain and difficulty; the thought can in an instant transport us into the most distant regions of the universe; or even beyond the universe, into the unbounded chaos, where nature is supposed to lie in total confusion. what never was seen, or heard of, may yet be conceived; nor is any thing beyond the power of thought, except what implies an absolute contradiction.
it may seem at first sight that human thought is utterly unbounded: it not only escapes all human power and authority as when a poor man thinks of becoming wealthy overnight, or when an ordinary citizen thinks of being a king, but isn't even confined within the limits of nature and reality. it is as easy for the imagination to form monsters and to join incongruous shapes and appearances as it is to conceive the most natural and familiar objects. and while the body must creep laboriously over the surface of one planet, thought can instantly transport us to the most distant regions of the universe and even further. what never was seen or heard of may still be conceived; nothing is beyond the power of thought except what implies an absolute contradiction.

but though our thought seems to possess this unbounded liberty, we shall find, upon a nearer examination, that it is really confined within very narrow limits, and that all this creative power of the mind amounts to no more than the faculty of compounding, transposing, augmenting, or diminishing the materials afforded us by the senses and experience. when we think of a golden mountain, we only join two consistent ideas, , with which we were formerly acquainted. a virtuous horse we can conceive; because, from our own feeling, we can conceive virtue; and this we may unite to the figure and shape of a horse, which is an animal familiar to us. in short, all the materials of thinking are derived either from our outward or inward sentiment: the mixture and composition of these belongs alone to the mind and will. or, to express myself in philosophical language, all our ideas or more feeble perceptions are copies of our impressions or more lively ones.
but although our thought seems to be so free, when we look more carefully we'll find that it is really confined within very narrow limits, and that all this creative power of the mind amounts merely to the ability to combine, transpose, enlarge, or shrink the materials that the senses and experience provide us with. when we think of a golden mountain, we only join two consistent ideas gold and mountain with which we were already familiar. we can conceive a virtuous horse because our own feelings enable us to conceive virtue, and we can join this with the shape of a horse, which is an animal we know. in short, all the materials of thinking are derived either from our outward senses or from our inward feelings: all that the mind and will do is to mix and combine these materials. put in philosophical terminology: all our ideas or more feeble perceptions are copies of our impressions or more lively ones.

to prove this, the two following arguments will, i hope, be sufficient. first, when we analyze our thoughts or ideas, however compounded or sublime, we always find that they resolve themselves into such simple ideas as were copied from a precedent feeling or sentiment. even those ideas, which, at first view, seem the most wide of this origin, are found, upon a nearer scrutiny, to be derived from it. the idea of god, as meaning an infinitely intelligent, wise, and good being, arises from reflecting on the operations of our own mind, and augmenting, without limit, those qualities of goodness and wisdom. we may prosecute this enquiry to what length we please; where we shall always find, that every idea which we examine is copied from a similar impression. those who would assert that this position is not universally true nor without exception, have only one, and that an easy method of refuting it; by producing that idea, which, in their opinion, is not derived from this source. it will then be incumbent on us, if we would maintain our doctrine, to produce the impression, or lively perception, which corresponds to it. secondly. if it happen, from a defect of the organ, that a man is not susceptible of any species of sensation, we always find that he is as little susceptible of the correspondent ideas. a blind man can form no notion of colours; a deaf man of sounds. restore either of them that sense in which he is deficient; by opening this new inlet for his sensations, you also open an inlet for the ideas; and he finds no difficulty in conceiving these objects. the case is the same, if the object, proper for exciting any sensation, has never been applied to the organ. a laplander or negro has no notion of the relish of wine. and though there are few or no instances of a like deficiency in the mind, where a person has never felt or is wholly incapable of a sentiment or passion that belongs to his species; yet we find the same observation to take place in a less degree. a man of mild manners can form no idea of inveterate revenge or cruelty; nor can a selfish heart easily conceive the heights of friendship and generosity. it is readily allowed, that other beings may possess many senses of which we can have no conception; because the ideas of them have never been introduced to us in the only manner by which an idea can have access to the mind, to wit, by the actual feeling and sensation.
here are two arguments that i hope will suffice to prove this. (1) when we analyse our thoughts or ideas however complex or elevated they are we always find them to be made up of simple ideas that were copied from earlier feelings or sensations. even ideas that at first glance seem to be the furthest removed from that origin are found on closer examination to be derived from it. the idea of god meaning an infinitely intelligent, wise, and good being comes from extending beyond all limits the qualities of goodness and wisdom that we find in our own minds. however far we push this enquiry, we shall find that every idea that we examine is copied from a similar impression. those who maintain that this isn't universally true and that there are exceptions to it have only one way of refuting it but it should be easy for them, if they are right. they need merely to produce an idea that they think isn't derived from this source. it will then be up to me, if i am to maintain my doctrine, to point to the impression or lively perception that corresponds to the idea they have produced. (2) if a man can't have some kind of sensation because there is something wrong with his eyes, ears etc., he will never be found to have corresponding ideas. a blind man can't form a notion of colours, or a deaf man a notion of sounds. if either is cured of his deafness or blindness, so that the sensations can get through to him, the ideas can then get through as well; and then he will find it easy to conceive these objects. the same is true for someone who has never experienced an object that will give a certain kind of sensation: a laplander or negro has no notion of the taste of wine because he has never had the sensation of tasting wine. similarly with inward feelings. it seldom if ever happens that a person has never felt or is wholly incapable of some human feeling or emotion, but the phenomenon i am describing does occur with feelings as well, though in lesser degree. a gentle person can't form any idea of determined revenge or cruelty; nor can a selfish one easily conceive the heights of friendship and generosity. everyone agrees that non-human beings may have many senses of which we can have no conception, because the ideas of them have never been introduced to us in the only way in which an idea can get into the mind, namely through actual feeling and sensation.

there is, however, one contradictory phenomenon, which may prove that it is not absolutely impossible for ideas to arise, independent of their correspondent impressions. i believe it will readily be allowed, that the several distinct ideas of colour, which enter by the eye, or those of sound, which are conveyed by the ear, are really different from each other; though, at the same time, resembling. now if this be true of different colours, it must be no less so of the different shades of the same colour; and each shade produces a distinct idea, independent of the rest. for if this should be denied, it is possible, by the continual gradation of shades, to run a colour insensibly into what is most remote from it; and if you will not allow any of the means to be different, you cannot, without absurdity, deny the extremes to be the same. suppose, therefore, a person to have enjoyed his sight for thirty years, and to have become perfectly acquainted with colours of all kinds except one particular shade of blue, for instance, which it never has been his fortune to meet with. let all the different shades of that colour, except that single one, be placed before him, descending gradually from the deepest to the lightest; it is plain that he will perceive a blank, where that shade is wanting, and will be sensible that there is a greater distance in that place between the contiguous colours than in any other. now i ask, whether it be possible for him, from his own imagination, to supply this deficiency, and raise up to himself the idea of that particular shade, though it had never been conveyed to him by his senses? i believe there are few but will be of opinion that he can: and this may serve as a proof that the simple ideas are not always, in every instance, derived from the correspondent impressions; though this instance is so singular, that it is scarcely worth our observing, and does not merit that for it alone we should alter our general maxim.
(there is, however, one counter-example that may prove that it isn't absolutely impossible for an idea to occur without a corresponding impression. i think it will be granted that the various distinct ideas of colour that enter the mind through the eye (or those of sound, which come in through the ear) really are different from each other, though they resemble one another in certain respects. if that holds for different colours, it must hold equally for the different shades of a single colour; so each shade produces a distinct idea, independent of the rest. (we can create a continuous gradation of shades, running from red at one end to green at the other, with each member of the series shading imperceptibly into its neighbour. if the immediate neighbours in the sequence are not different from one another, then red is not different from green, which is absurd.) now, suppose that a sighted person has become perfectly familiar with colours of all kinds, except for one particular shade of blue (for instance), which he happens never to have met with. let all the other shades of blue be placed before him, descending gradually from the deepest to the lightest: it is obvious that he will notice a blank in the place where the missing shade should go. that is, he will be aware that there is a greater quality-distance between that pair of neighbouring shades than between any other neighbour-pair in the series. can he fill the blank from his own imagination, calling up in his mind the idea of that particular shade, even though it has never been conveyed to him by his senses? most people, i think, will agree that he can. this seems to show that simple ideas are not always, in every instance, derived from corresponding impressions. still, the example is so singular that it's hardly worth noticing, and on its own it isn't a good enough reason for us to alter our general maxim.)

here, therefore, is a proposition, which not only seems, in itself, simple and intelligible; but, if a proper use were made of it, might render every dispute equally intelligible, and banish all that jargon, which has so long taken possession of metaphysical reasonings, and drawn disgrace upon them. all ideas, especially abstract ones, are naturally faint and obscure: the mind has but a slender hold of them: they are apt to be confounded with other resembling ideas; and when we have often employed any term, though without a distinct meaning, we are apt to imagine it has a determinate idea annexed to it. on the contrary, all impressions, that is, all sensations, either outward or inward, are strong and vivid: the limits between them are more exactly determined: nor is it easy to fall into any error or mistake with regard to them. when we entertain, therefore, any suspicion that a philosophical term is employed without any meaning or idea (as is but too frequent), we need but enquire, ? and if it be impossible to assign any, this will serve to confirm our suspicion. by bringing ideas into so clear a light we may reasonably hope to remove all dispute, which may arise, concerning their nature and reality.
so here is a proposition that not only seems to be simple and intelligible in itself, but could if properly used make every dispute equally intelligible by banishing all that nonsensical jargon that has so long dominated metaphysical reasonings. all ideas, especially abstract ones, are naturally faint and obscure, so that the mind has only a weak hold on them. ideas are apt to be mixed up with other ideas that resemble them. we tend to assume that a given word is associated with a determinate idea just because we have used it so often, even if in using it we haven't had any distinct meaning for it. in contrast with this, all our impressions i.e. all our outward or inward sensations are strong and vivid. the boundaries between them are more exactly placed, and it is harder to make mistakes about them. so when we come to suspect that a philosophical term is being used without any meaning or idea (as happens all too often), we need only to ask: from what impression is that supposed idea derived? if none can be pointed out, that will confirm our suspicion that the term is meaningless, i.e. has no associated idea. by bringing ideas into this clear light we may reasonably hope to settle any disputes that arise about whether they exist and what they are like.

but admitting these terms, , what is original or copied from no precedent perception, then may we assert that all our impressions are innate, and our ideas not innate.
philosophers who have denied that there are any innate ideas probably meant only that all ideas were copies of our impressions; though i have to admit that the terms in which they expressed this were not chosen with enough care, or defined with enough precision, to prevent all mistakes about their doctrine. for what is meant by innate? if innate is equivalent to natural, then all the perceptions and ideas of the mind must be granted to be innate or natural, in whatever sense we take the latter word, whether in opposition to what is uncommon, what is artificial, or what is miraculous. if innate means contemporary with our birth, the dispute seems to be frivolous there is no point in enquiring when thinking begins, whether before, at, or after our birth. again, the word idea seems commonly to be taken in a very loose sense by locke and others, who use it to stand for any of our perceptions, sensations and 3: association of ideas passions, as well as thoughts. i would like to know what it can mean to assert that self-love, or resentment of injuries, or the passion between the sexes, is not innate! but admitting the words impressions and ideas in the sense explained above, and understanding by innate what is original or not copied from any previous perception, then we can assert that all our impressions are innate and none of our ideas are innate.

to be ingenuous, i must own it to be my opinion, that locke was betrayed into this question by the schoolmen, who, making use of undefined terms, draw out their disputes to a tedious length, without ever touching the point in question. a like ambiguity and circumlocution seem to run through that philosopher's reasonings on this as well as most other subjects.
frankly, i think that locke was tricked into this question by the schoolmen, who have used undefined terms to drag out their disputes to a tedious length without ever touching the point at issue. a similar ambiguity and circumlocution seem to run through all that philosophers reasonings on this as well as on most other subjects.

of the association of ideas.
section 3: the association of ideas

it is evident that there is a principle of connexion between the different thoughts or ideas of the mind, and that, in their appearance to the memory or imagination, they introduce each other with a certain degree of method and regularity. in our more serious thinking or discourse this is so observable that any particular thought, which breaks in upon the regular tract or chain of ideas, is immediately remarked and rejected. and even in our wildest and most wandering reveries, nay in our very dreams, we shall find, if we reflect, that the imagination ran not altogether at adventures, but that there was still a connexion upheld among the different ideas, which succeeded each other. were the loosest and freest conversation to be transcribed, there would immediately be observed something which connected it in all its transitions. or where this is wanting, the person who broke the thread of discourse might still inform you, that there had secretly revolved in his mind a succession of thought, which had gradually led him from the subject of conversation. among different languages, even where we cannot suspect the least connexion or communication, it is found, that the words, expressive of ideas, the most compounded, do yet nearly correspond to each other: a certain proof that the simple ideas, comprehended in the compound ones, were bound together by some universal principle, which had an equal influence on all mankind.
the mind's thoughts or ideas are obviously inter-connected in some systematic way: there is some order and regularity in how, in memory and imagination, one idea leads on to another. this is so clearly true of our more serious thinking or talking what when a particular thought breaks in on the regular sequence of ideas it is immediately noticed and rejected as irrelevant. even in our wildest daydreams and night dreams we shall find, if we think about it, that the imagination doesn't entirely run wild, and that even in imagination the different ideas follow one another in a somewhat regular fashion. if the loosest and freest conversation were written down, you would be able to see something holding it together through all its twists and turns. or, if not, the person who broke the thread might tell you that he had been gradually led away from the subject of conversation by some orderly train of thought that had been quietly going on in his mind. we also find that the compound ideas that are the meanings of words in one language are usually also the meanings of words in others, even when there can be no question of the languages having influenced one another. this is conclusive evidence that the simple ideas of which the compound ones are made up were linked by some universal factor that had an equal influence on all mankind.

though it be too obvious to escape observation, that different ideas are connected together; i do not find that any philosopher has attempted to enumerate or class all the principles of association; a subject, however, that seems worthy of curiosity. to me, there appear to be only three principles of connexion among ideas, namely, .
the fact that different ideas are connected is too obvious to be overlooked; yet i haven't found any philosopher trying to list or classify all the sources of association. this seems to be worth doing. to me there appear to be only three factors connecting ideas with one another, namely, resemblance, contiguity in time or place, and cause or effect.

that these principles serve to connect ideas will not, i believe, be much doubted. a picture naturally leads our thoughts to the original: the mention of one apartment in a building naturally introduces an enquiry or discourse concerning the others: and if we think of a wound, we can scarcely forbear reflecting on the pain which follows it. but that this enumeration is complete, and that there are no other principles of association except these, may be difficult to prove to the satisfaction of the reader, or even to a man's own satisfaction. all we can do, in such cases, is to run over several instances, and examine carefully the principle which binds the different thoughts to each other, never stopping till we render the principle as general as possible. the more instances we examine, and the more care we employ, the more assurance shall we acquire, that the enumeration, which we form from the whole, is complete and entire.
i don't think there will be much doubt that our ideas are connected by these factors. a picture naturally leads our thoughts to the thing that is depicted in it; the mention of one room naturally introduces remarks or questions about other rooms in the same building; and if we think of a wound, we can hardly help thinking about the pain that follows it. but it will be hard to prove to anyone's satisfaction the reader's or my own that this these three are the only sources of association among our ideas. all we can do is to consider a large number of instances where ideas are connected, find in each case what connects them, and eventually develop a really general account of this phenomenon. the more cases we look at, and the more care we employ on them, the more assured we can be that our final list of principles of association is complete.

contiguity.
for instance, contrast or contrariety is also a connection among ideas. but we might considered it as a mixture of causation and resemblance. where two objects are contrary, one destroys the other; that is, causes its annihilation, and the idea of an object's annihilation implies the idea of its former existence.

for instance, contrast or contrariety is also a connexion among ideas: but it may, perhaps, be considered as a mixture of . where two objects are contrary, the one destroys the other; that is, the cause of its annihilation, and the idea of the annihilation of an object, implies the idea of its former existence. section iv. sceptical doubts concerning the operations of the understanding. part i.
section 4: sceptical doubts about the operations of the understanding

all the objects of human reason or enquiry may naturally be divided into two kinds, to wit, , expresses a relation between these numbers. propositions of this kind are discoverable by the mere operation of thought, without dependence on what is anywhere existent in the universe. though there never were a circle or triangle in nature, the truths demonstrated by euclid would for ever retain their certainty and evidence.
all the objects of human reason or enquiry fall naturally into two kinds, namely relations of ideas and matters of fact. the first kind include geometry, algebra, and arithmetic, and indeed every statement that is either intuitively or demonstratively certain. that the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the squares of the other two sides expresses a relation between those figures. that three times five equals half of thirty expresses a relation between those numbers. propositions of this kind can be discovered purely by thinking, with no need to attend to anything that actually exists anywhere in the universe. the truths that euclid demonstrated would still be certain and self-evident even if there never were a circle or triangle in nature.

matters of fact, which are the second objects of human reason, are not ascertained in the same manner; nor is our evidence of their truth, however great, of a like nature with the foregoing. the contrary of every matter of fact is still possible; because it can never imply a contradiction, and is conceived by the mind with the same facility and distinctness, as if ever so conformable to reality. we should in vain, therefore, attempt to demonstrate its falsehood. were it demonstratively false, it would imply a contradiction, and could never be distinctly conceived by the mind.
matters of fact, which are the second objects of human reason, are not established in the same way; and we cannot have such strong grounds for thinking them true. the contrary of every matter of fact is still possible, because it doesn't imply a contradiction and is conceived by the mind as easily and clearly as if it conformed perfectly to reality. that the sun will not rise tomorrow is just as intelligible as and no more contradictory than the proposition that the sun will rise tomorrow. it would therefore be a waste of time to try to demonstrate its falsehood. if it were demonstratively false, it would imply a contradiction and so could never be clearly conceived by the mind.

all reasonings concerning matter of fact seem to be founded on the relation of . by means of that relation alone we can go beyond the evidence of our memory and senses. if you were to ask a man, why he believes any matter of fact, which is absent; for instance, that his friend is in the country, or in france; he would give you a reason; and this reason would be some other fact; as a letter received from him, or the knowledge of his former resolutions and promises. a man finding a watch or any other machine in a desert island, would conclude that there had once been men in that island. all our reasonings concerning fact are of the same nature. and here it is constantly supposed that there is a connexion between the present fact and that which is inferred from it. were there nothing to bind them together, the inference would be entirely precarious. the hearing of an articulate voice and rational discourse in the dark assures us of the presence of some person: why? because these are the effects of the human make and fabric, and closely connected with it. if we anatomize all the other reasonings of this nature, we shall find that they are founded on the relation of cause and effect, and that this relation is either near or remote, direct or collateral. heat and light are collateral effects of fire, and the one effect may justly be inferred from the other.
all reasonings about matters of fact seem to be based on the relation of cause and effect, which is the only relation that can take us beyond the evidence of our memory and senses. if you ask someone why he believes some matter of fact which isn't now present to him for instance that his friend is now in france he will give you a reason; and this reason will be some other fact, such as that he has received a letter from his friend or that his friend had planned to go to france. someone who finds a watch or other machine on a desert island will conclude that there have been men on that island. all our reasonings concerning fact are like this. when we reason in this way, we suppose that the present fact is connected with the one that we infer from it. if there were nothing to bind the two facts together, the inference of one from the other would be utterly shaky. hearing the sounds of someone talking rationally in the dark assures us of the presence of some person. why? because such sounds are the effects of the human constitution, and are closely connected with it. all our other reasonings of this sort, when examined in detail, turn out to be based on the relation of cause and effect. the causal chain from the evidence to the matter of fact conclusion may be short or long. and it may be that the causal connection between them isn't direct but collateral as when one sees light and infers heat, not because either causes the other but because the two are collateral effects of a single cause, namely fire.

if we would satisfy ourselves, therefore, concerning the nature of that evidence, which assures us of matters of fact, we must enquire how we arrive at the knowledge of cause and effect.
so if we want to understand the basis of our confidence about matters of fact, we must find out how we come to know about cause and effect.

i shall venture to affirm, as a general proposition, which admits of no exception, that the knowledge of this relation is not, in any instance, attained by reasonings ; but arises entirely from experience, when we find that any particular objects are constantly conjoined with each other. let an object be presented to a man of ever so strong natural reason and abilities; if that object be entirely new to him, he will not be able, by the most accurate examination of its sensible qualities, to discover any of its causes or effects. adam, though his rational faculties be supposed, at the very first, entirely perfect, could not have inferred from the fluidity and transparency of water that it would suffocate him, or from the light and warmth of fire that it would consume him. no object ever discovers, by the qualities which appear to the senses, either the causes which produced it, or the effects which will arise from it; nor can our reason, unassisted by experience, ever draw any inference concerning real existence and matter of fact.
i venture to assert, as true without exception, that knowledge about causes is never acquired through a priori reasoning, and always comes from our experience of finding that particular objects are constantly associated with one other. present an object to a man whose skill and intelligence are as great as you like; if the object is of a kind that is entirely new to him, no amount of studying of its perceptible qualities will enable him to discover any of its causes or effects. adam, even if his reasoning abilities were perfect from the start, couldn't have inferred from the fluidity and transparency of water that it could drown him, or from the light and warmth of fire that it could burn him. the qualities of an object that appear to the senses never reveal the causes that produced the object or the effects that it will have; nor can our reason, unaided by experience, ever draw any conclusion about real existence and matters of fact.

but the same truth may not appear, at first sight, to have the same evidence with regard to events, which have become familiar to us from our first appearance in the world, which bear a close analogy to the whole course of nature, and which are supposed to depend on the simple qualities of objects, without any secret structure of parts. we are apt to imagine that we could discover these effects by the mere operation of our reason, without experience. we fancy, that were we brought on a sudden into this world, we could at first have inferred that one billiard-ball would communicate motion to another upon impulse; and that we needed not to have waited for the event, in order to pronounce with certainty concerning it. such is the influence of custom, that, where it is strongest, it not only covers our natural ignorance, but even conceals itself, and seems not to take place, merely because it is found in the highest degree.
but this same proposition that causes and effects cannot be discovered by reason may seem less obvious when it is applied to events of kinds (1) that we have been familiar with all our lives, (2) that are very like the whole course of nature, and (3) that are supposed to depend on the simple perceptible qualities of objects and not on any secret structure of parts. we are apt to imagine that we could discover these effects purely through reason, without experience. we fancy that if we had been suddenly brought into this world, we could have known straight off that when one billiard ball strikes another it will make it move knowing this for certain, without having to try it out on billiard balls. custom has such a great influence! at its strongest it not only hides our natural ignorance but even conceals itself : just because custom is so strongly at work, we aren't aware of its being at work at all.

but to convince us that all the laws of nature, and all the operations of bodies without exception, are known only by experience, the following reflections may, perhaps, suffice. were any object presented to us, and were we required to pronounce concerning the effect, which will result from it, without consulting past observation; after what manner, i beseech you, must the mind proceed in this operation? it must invent or imagine some event, which it ascribes to the object as its effect; and it is plain that this invention must be entirely arbitrary. the mind can never possibly find the effect in the supposed cause, by the most accurate scrutiny and examination. for the effect is totally different from the cause, and consequently can never be discovered in it. motion in the second billiard-ball is a quite distinct event from motion in the first; nor is there anything in the one to suggest the smallest hint of the other. a stone or piece of metal raised into the air, and left without any support, immediately falls: but to consider the matter  will never be able to show us any foundation for this preference.
if you're not yet convinced that absolutely all the laws of nature and operations of bodies can be known only by experience, consider the following. if we are asked to say what the effects will be of some object, without consulting past experience of it, how can the mind go about doing this? it must invent or imagine some event as being the object's effect; and clearly this invention must be entirely arbitrary. the mind can't possibly find the effect in the supposed cause, however carefully we examine it, for the effect is totally different from the cause and therefore can never be discovered in it. motion in the second billiard ball is a distinct event from motion in the first, and nothing in the first ball's motion even hints at motion in the second. a stone raised into the air and left without any support immediately falls; but if we consider this situation a priori we shall find nothing that generates the idea of a downward rather than an upward or some other motion in the stone.

hence we may discover the reason why no philosopher, who is rational and modest, has ever pretended to assign the ultimate cause of any natural operation, or to show distinctly the action of that power, which produces any single effect in the universe. it is confessed, that the utmost effort of human reason is to reduce the principles, productive of natural phenomena, to a greater simplicity, and to resolve the many particular effects into a few general causes, by means of reasonings from analogy, experience, and observation. but as to the causes of these general causes, we should in vain attempt their discovery; nor shall we ever be able to satisfy ourselves, by any particular explication of them. these ultimate springs and principles are totally shut up from human curiosity and enquiry. elasticity, gravity, cohesion of parts, communication of motion by impulse; these are probably the ultimate causes and principles which we shall ever discover in nature; and we may esteem ourselves sufficiently happy, if, by accurate enquiry and reasoning, we can trace up the particular phenomena to, or near to, these general principles. the most perfect philosophy of the natural kind only staves off our ignorance a little longer: as perhaps the most perfect philosophy of the moral or metaphysical kind serves only to discover larger portions of it. thus the observation of human blindness and weakness is the result of all philosophy, and meets us at every turn, in spite of our endeavours to elude or avoid it.
that's why no reasonable scientist has ever claimed to know the ultimate cause of any natural process, or to show clearly and in detail what goes into the causing of any single effect in the universe. it is agreed that the most human reason can achieve is to make the principles that govern natural phenomena simpler, bringing many particular effects together under a few general causes by reasoning from analogy, experience and observation. but if we try to discover the causes of these general causes, we shall be wasting our labour. these ultimate sources and principles are totally hidden from human enquiry. probably the deepest causes and principles that we shall ever discover in nature are these four: elasticity, gravity, cohesion of parts which makes the difference between a pebble and a pile of dust, and communication of motion by impact as when one billiard ball hits another. we shall be lucky if by careful work we can explain particular phenomena in terms of these four, or something close to them. the perfect philosophy of the natural kind only staves off our ignorance a little longer; just as, perhaps, the most perfect philosophy of the moral or metaphysical kind serves only to show us more of how ignorant we are. so both kinds of philosophy eventually lead us to a view of human blindness and weakness a view that confronts us at every turn despite our attempts to get away from it.

nor is geometry, when taken into the assistance of natural philosophy, ever able to remedy this defect, or lead us into the knowledge of ultimate causes, by all that accuracy of reasoning for which it is so justly celebrated. every part of mixed mathematics proceeds upon the supposition that certain laws are established by nature in her operations; and abstract reasonings are employed, either to assist experience in the discovery of these laws, or to determine their influence in particular instances, where it depends upon any precise degree of distance and quantity. thus, it is a law of motion, discovered by experience, that the moment or force of any body in motion is in the compound ratio or proportion of its solid contents and its velocity; and consequently, that a small force may remove the greatest obstacle or raise the greatest weight, if, by any contrivance or machinery, we can increase the velocity of that force, so as to make it an overmatch for its antagonist. geometry assists us in the application of this law, by giving us the just dimensions of all the parts and figures which can enter into any species of machine; but still the discovery of the law itself is owing merely to experience, and all the abstract reasonings in the world could never lead us one step towards the knowledge of it. when we reason , and consider merely any object or cause, as it appears to the mind, independent of all observation, it never could suggest to us the notion of any distinct object, such as its effect; much less, show us the inseparable and inviolable connexion between them. a man must be very sagacious who could discover by reasoning that crystal is the effect of heat, and ice of cold, without being previously acquainted with the operation of these qualities.
although geometry is rightly famous for the accuracy of its reasoning, when it is brought to the aid of physics it can't lead us to knowledge of ultimate causes, thereby curing the ignorance i have been discussing. every part of applied mathematics works on the assumption that nature operates according to certain established laws; and abstract reasonings are used either to help experience to discover these laws or to work out how the laws apply in particular cases where exactness of measurement is relevant. here is an example. it is a law of motion, discovered by experience, that the force of any moving body is proportional to its mass and to its velocity; so we can get a small force to overcome the greatest obstacle if we can devise a machine that will increase the velocity of the force so that it overwhelms its antagonist. geometry helps us to apply this law by showing us how to work out the sizes and shapes of all the parts of the machine that we make for this purpose; but the law itself is something we know purely from experience, and no amount of abstract reasoning could lead us one step towards the knowledge of it. when we reason a priori, considering some object or cause merely as it appears to the mind and independently of any observation of its behaviour, it could never prompt us to think of any other item, such as its effect. much less could it show us the unbreakable connection between them. it would take a very clever person to discover by reasoning that heat makes crystals and cold makes ice without having had experience of the effects of heat and cold!

part ii.
part 2

but we have not yet attained any tolerable satisfaction with regard to the question first proposed. each solution still gives rise to a new question as difficult as the foregoing, and leads us on to farther enquiries. when it is asked,  this implies a new question, which may be of more difficult solution and explication. philosophers, that give themselves airs of superior wisdom and sufficiency, have a hard task when they encounter persons of inquisitive dispositions, who push them from every corner to which they retreat, and who are sure at last to bring them to some dangerous dilemma. the best expedient to prevent this confusion, is to be modest in our pretensions; and even to discover the difficulty ourselves before it is objected to us. by this means, we may make a kind of merit of our very ignorance.
but we haven't yet found an acceptable answer to the question that i initially asked. each solution raises new questions that are as hard to answer as the first one was, and that lead us on to further enquiries. to the question what is the nature of all our reasonings concerning matter of fact? the proper answer seems to be that they are based on the relation of cause and effect. when it is further asked, what is the foundation of all our reasonings about cause and effect? we can answer in one word, experience. but if we persist with questions, and ask, what are inferences from experience based on? this raises a new question that may be harder still. philosophers for all their air of superior wisdom are given a hard time by people who persist with questions, pushing them from every corner into which they retreat, finally bringing them to some dangerous dilemma. the best way for us to avoid such an embarrassment is not to claim too much in the first place, and even to find the difficulty for ourselves before it is brought against us as an objection. in this way we can make a kind of merit even of our ignorance!

i shall content myself, in this section, with an easy task, and shall pretend only to give a negative answer to the question here proposed. i say then, that, even after we have experience of the operations of cause and effect, our conclusions from that experience are  founded on reasoning, or any process of the understanding. this answer we must endeavour both to explain and to defend.
in this section i shall settle for something easy, offering only a negative answer to the question i have raised about what inferences from experience are based on. it is this: even after we have experience of the operations of cause and effect, the conclusions we draw from that experience are not based on reasoning or on any process of the understanding. i shall try to explain and defend this answer.

it must certainly be allowed, that nature has kept us at a great distance from all her secrets, and has afforded us only the knowledge of a few superficial qualities of objects; while she conceals from us those powers and principles on which the influence of those objects entirely depends. our senses inform us of the colour, weight, and consistence of bread; but neither sense nor reason can ever inform us of those qualities which fit it for the nourishment and support of a human body. sight or feeling conveys an idea of the actual motion of bodies; but as to that wonderful force or power, which would carry on a moving body for ever in a continued change of place, and which bodies never lose but by communicating it to others; of this we cannot form the most distant conception. but notwithstanding this ignorance of natural powers and principles, we always presume, when we see like sensible qualities, that they have like secret powers, and expect that effects, similar to those which we have experienced, will follow from them. if a body of like colour and consistence with that bread, which we have formerly eat, be presented to us, we make no scruple of repeating the experiment, and foresee, with certainty, like nourishment and support. now this is a process of the mind or thought, of which i would willingly know the foundation. it is allowed on all hands that there is no known connexion between the sensible qualities and the secret powers; and consequently, that the mind is not led to form such a conclusion concerning their constant and regular conjunction, by anything which it knows of their nature. as to past . i shall allow, if you please, that the one proposition may justly be inferred from the other: i know, in fact, that it always is inferred. but if you insist that the inference is made by a chain of reasoning, i desire you to produce that reasoning. the connexion between these propositions is not intuitive. there is required a medium, which may enable the mind to draw such an inference, if indeed it be drawn by reasoning and argument. what that medium is, i must confess, passes my comprehension; and it is incumbent on those to produce it, who assert that it really exists, and is the origin of all our conclusions concerning matter of fact.
it must be granted that nature has kept us at a distance from all its secrets, and has allowed us to know only a few superficial qualities of objects, concealing from us the powers and energies on which the influence of the objects entirely depends. our senses tell us about the colour, weight and consistency of bread; but neither the senses nor reason can ever tell us about the qualities that enable bread to nourish a human body. sight or touch gives us an idea of the motion of bodies; but as for the amazing force that keeps a body moving for ever unless it collides with other bodies we cannot have the remotest conception of that. despite this ignorance of natural powers and forces, however, we always assume that the same sensible qualities will have the same secret powers, and we expect them to have the same effects that we have found them to have in our past experience. if we are given some stuff with the colour and consistency of bread that we have eaten in the past, we don't hesitate to repeat the experiment of eating it, confidently expecting it to nourish and support us. that's what we do every morning at the breakfast table: confidently experimenting with bread-like stuff by eating it! i would like to know what the basis is for this process of thought. everyone agrees that a thing's sensible qualities aren't connected with its secret powers in any way that we know about, so that the mind isn't led to a conclusion about their constant and regular conjunction through anything it knows of their nature. all that past experience can tell us, directly and for sure, concerns the behaviour of the particular objects we observed, at the particular time when we observed them. my experience directly and certainly informs me that that fire consumed coal then; but it's silent about the behaviour of the same fire a few minutes later, and about other fires at any time. why should this experience be extended to future times and to other objects, which for all we know may only seem similar? that's what i want to know. the bread that i formerly ate nourished me; i.e. a body with such and such sensible qualities did at that time have such and such secret powers. but does it follow that other bread must also nourish me at other times, and that the same perceptible qualities must always be accompanied by the same secret powers? it doesn't seem to follow necessarily. anyway, it must be admitted that in such a case as this the mind draws a conclusion; it takes a certain step, goes through a process of thought or inference, which needs to be explained. these two propositions are far from being the same: i have found that such and such an object has always had such and such an effect. i foresee that other objects which appear similar will have similar effects. the second proposition is always inferred from the first; and if you like i'll grant that it is rightly inferred. but if you insist that the inference is made by a chain of reasoning, i challenge you to produce the reasoning. the connection between these propositions is not intuitive. if the inference is to be conducted through reason alone, it must be with help from some intermediate step. but when i try to think what that intermediate step might be, i am defeated. those who assert that it really exists and is the origin of all our conclusions about matters of fact owe us an account of what it is.

the word, power, is here used in a loose and popular sense. the more accurate explication of it would give additional evidence to this argument. see sect. 7. this negative argument must certainly, in process of time, become altogether convincing, if many penetrating and able philosophers shall turn their enquiries this way and no one be ever able to discover any connecting proposition or intermediate step, which supports the understanding in this conclusion. but as the question is yet new, every reader may not trust so far to his own penetration, as to conclude, because an argument escapes his enquiry, that therefore it does not really exist. for this reason it may be requisite to venture upon a more difficult task; and enumerating all the branches of human knowledge, endeavour to show that none of them can afford such an argument.
they haven't given any account of this, which i take to be evidence that none can be given. if many penetrating and able philosophers try and fail to discover a connecting proposition or intermediate step through which the understanding can perform this inference from past effects to future ones, my negative line of thought about this will eventually be found entirely convincing. but as the question is still new, the reader may not trust his own abilities enough to conclude that because he can't find a certain argument it doesn't exist. in that case i need to tackle a harder task than i have so far undertaken namely, going through all the branches of human knowledge one by one, trying to show that none can give us such an argument.

all reasonings may be divided into two kinds, namely, demonstrative reasoning, or that concerning relations of ideas, and moral reasoning, or that concerning matter of fact and existence. that there are no demonstrative arguments in the case seems evident; since it implies no contradiction that the course of nature may change, and that an object, seemingly like those which we have experienced, may be attended with different or contrary effects. may i not clearly and distinctly conceive that a body, falling from the clouds, and which, in all other respects, resembles snow, has yet the taste of salt or feeling of fire? is there any more intelligible proposition than to affirm, that all the trees will flourish in december and january, and decay in may and june? now whatever is intelligible, and can be distinctly conceived, implies no contradiction, and can never be proved false by any demonstrative argument or abstract reasoning .
all reasonings fall into two kinds: (1) demonstrative reasoning, or that concerning relations of ideas, and (2) factual reasoning, or that concerning matters of fact and existence. that no (1) demonstrative arguments are involved in the inference from past to future seems evident; since there is no outright contradiction in supposing that the course of nature will change so that an object that seems like ones we have experienced will have different or contrary effects from theirs. can't i clearly and distinctly conceive that snowy stuff falling from the clouds might taste salty or feel hot? is there anything unintelligible about supposing that all the trees will flourish in december and lose their leaves in june? now, if something is intelligible and can be distinctly conceived, it implies no contradiction and can never be proved false by any demonstrative argument or abstract a priori reasoning.

if we be, therefore, engaged by arguments to put trust in past experience, and make it the standard of our future judgement, these arguments must be probable only, or such as regard matter of fact and real existence, according to the division above mentioned. but that there is no argument of this kind, must appear, if our explication of that species of reasoning be admitted as solid and satisfactory. we have said that all arguments concerning existence are founded on the relation of cause and effect; that our knowledge of that relation is derived entirely from experience; and that all our experimental conclusions proceed upon the supposition that the future will be conformable to the past. to endeavour, therefore, the proof of this last supposition by probable arguments, or arguments regarding existence, must be evidently going in a circle, and taking that for granted, which is the very point in question.
so if there are arguments to justify us in trusting past experience and making it the standard of our future judgment, these arguments can only be probable; i.e. they must be of the kind (2) that concern matters of fact and real existence, to put it in terms of the classification i have given. but probable reasoning, if i have described it accurately, can't provide us with the argument we are looking for. according to my account, all arguments about existence are based on the relation of cause and effect; our knowledge of that relation is derived entirely from experience; and in drawing conclusions from experience we assume that the future will be like the past. so if we try to prove this assumption by probable arguments, i.e. arguments regarding existence, we shall obviously be going in a circle, taking for granted the very point that is in question.

in reality, all arguments from experience are founded on the similarity which we discover among natural objects, and by which we are induced to expect effects similar to those which we have found to follow from such objects. and though none but a fool or madman will ever pretend to dispute the authority of experience, or to reject that great guide of human life, it may surely be allowed a philosopher to have so much curiosity at least as to examine the principle of human nature, which gives this mighty authority to experience, and makes us draw advantage from that similarity which nature has placed among different objects. from causes which appear  we expect similar effects. this is the sum of all our experimental conclusions. now it seems evident that, if this conclusion were formed by reason, it would be as perfect at first, and upon one instance, as after ever so long a course of experience. but the case is far otherwise. nothing so like as eggs; yet no one, on account of this appearing similarity, expects the same taste and relish in all of them. it is only after a long course of uniform experiments in any kind, that we attain a firm reliance and security with regard to a particular event. now where is that process of reasoning which, from one instance, draws a conclusion, so different from that which it infers from a hundred instances that are nowise different from that single one? this question i propose as much for the sake of information, as with an intention of raising difficulties. i cannot find, i cannot imagine any such reasoning. but i keep my mind still open to instruction, if any one will vouchsafe to bestow it on me.
in reality, all arguments from experience are based on the similarities that we find among natural objects which lead us to expect that the effects of the objects will also be similar. although only a fool or a madman would ever challenge the authority of experience or reject it as a guide to human life, still perhaps a philosopher may be allowed to ask what it is about human nature that gives this mighty authority to experience and leads us to profit from the similarities that nature has established among different objects. our inferences from experience all boil down to this: from causes that appear similar we expect similar effects. if this were based on reason, we could draw the conclusion as well after a single instance as after a long course of experience. but that isn't in fact how things stand. nothing so similar as eggs; yet no-one expects them all to taste the same! when we become sure of what will result from a particular event, it is only because we have experienced many events of that kind, all with the same effects. now, where is that process of reasoning that infers from one instance a conclusion that was not inferred from a hundred previous instances just like this single one? i ask this for the sake of information as much as with the intention of raising difficulties. i can't find i can't imagine any such reasoning. but i am willing to learn, if anyone can teach me.

should it be said that, from a number of uniform experiments, we , he is not guilty of a tautology, nor are these propositions in any respect the same. you say that the one proposition is an inference from the other. but you must confess that the inference is not intuitive; neither is it demonstrative: of what nature is it, then? to say it is experimental, is begging the question. for all inferences from experience suppose, as their foundation, that the future will resemble the past, and that similar powers will be conjoined with similar sensible qualities. if there be any suspicion that the course of nature may change, and that the past may be no rule for the future, all experience becomes useless, and can give rise to no inference or conclusion. it is impossible, therefore, that any arguments from experience can prove this resemblance of the past to the future; since all these arguments are founded on the supposition of that resemblance. let the course of things be allowed hitherto ever so regular; that alone, without some new argument or inference, proves not that, for the future, it will continue so. in vain do you pretend to have learned the nature of bodies from your past experience. their secret nature, and consequently all their effects and influence, may change, without any change in their sensible qualities. this happens sometimes, and with regard to some objects: why may it not happen always, and with regard to all objects? what logic, what process of argument secures you against this supposition? my practice, you say, refutes my doubts. but you mistake the purport of my question. as an agent, i am quite satisfied in the point; but as a philosopher, who has some share of curiosity, i will not say scepticism, i want to learn the foundation of this inference. no reading, no enquiry has yet been able to remove my difficulty, or give me satisfaction in a matter of such importance. can i do better than propose the difficulty to the public, even though, perhaps, i have small hopes of obtaining a solution? we shall at least, by this means, be sensible of our ignorance, if we do not augment our knowledge.
i have found in all past instances such and such sensible qualities conjoined with such and such secret powers, and then goes on to say similar sensible qualities will always be combined with similar secret powers, he isn't guilty of merely repeating himself; these propositions are in no way the same. the second proposition is inferred from the first, you may say; but you must admit that the inference isn't intuitive. what kind of inference is it, then? to call it experiential is to assume the point that is in question. for all inferences from experience are based on the assumption that the future will resemble the past, and that similar powers will be combined with similar sensible qualities. as soon as the suspicion is planted that the course of nature may change, so that the past stops being a guide to the future, all experience becomes useless and can't support any inference or conclusion. so no arguments from experience can support this resemblance of the past to the future, because all such arguments are based on the assumption of that resemblance. however regular the course of things has been, that fact on its own doesn't prove that the future will also be regular. it's no use your claiming to have learned the nature of bodies from your past experience. their secret nature, and consequently all their effects and influence, may change without any change in their sensible qualities. this happens sometimes with regard to some objects: why couldn't it happen always with regard to all? what logic, what process of argument, secures you against this? you may say that i don't behave as though i had doubts about this; but that would reflect a misunderstanding of why i am raising these questions. when i'm considering how to act, i am quite satisfied that the future will be like the past; but as a philosopher with an enquiring i won't say sceptical turn of mind, i want to know what this confidence is based on. nothing i have read, no research i have done, has yet been able to remove my difficulty. can i do better than to put the difficulty before the public, even though i may not have much hope of being given a solution? in this way we shall at least be aware of our ignorance, even if we don't increase our knowledge.

i must confess that a man is guilty of unpardonable arrogance who concludes, because an argument has escaped his own investigation, that therefore it does not really exist. i must also confess that, though all the learned, for several ages, should have employed themselves in fruitless search upon any subject, it may still, perhaps, be rash to conclude positively that the subject must, therefore, pass all human comprehension. even though we examine all the sources of our knowledge, and conclude them unfit for such a subject, there may still remain a suspicion, that the enumeration is not complete, or the examination not accurate. but with regard to the present subject, there are some considerations which seem to remove all this accusation of arrogance or suspicion of mistake.
it would be inexcusably arrogant to conclude that because i haven't discovered a certain argument it doesn't really exist. even if learned men down the centuries have searched for something without finding it, perhaps it would still be rash to conclude with confidence that the subject must surpass human understanding. even though we examine all the sources of our knowledge and conclude that they are unfit for a given subject, we may still suspect that the list of sources is not complete or our examination of them not accurate. with regard to our present subject, however, there are reasons to think that my conclusion is certainly right and that i am not arrogant in thinking so.

it is certain that the most ignorant and stupid peasants nay infants, nay even brute beasts improve by experience, and learn the qualities of natural objects, by observing the effects which result from them. when a child has felt the sensation of pain from touching the flame of a candle, he will be careful not to put his hand near any candle; but will expect a similar effect from a cause which is similar in its sensible qualities and appearance. if you assert, therefore, that the understanding of the child is led into this conclusion by any process of argument or ratiocination, i may justly require you to produce that argument; nor have you any pretence to refuse so equitable a demand. you cannot say that the argument is abstruse, and may possibly escape your enquiry; since you confess that it is obvious to the capacity of a mere infant. if you hesitate, therefore, a moment, or if, after reflection, you produce any intricate or profound argument, you, in a manner, give up the question, and confess that it is not reasoning which engages us to suppose the past resembling the future, and to expect similar effects from causes which are, to appearance, similar. this is the proposition which i intended to enforce in the present section. if i be right, i pretend not to have made any mighty discovery. and if i be wrong, i must acknowledge myself to be indeed a very backward scholar; since i cannot now discover an argument which, it seems, was perfectly familiar to me long before i was out of my cradle.
it is certain that the most ignorant and stupid peasants, even infants, indeed even brute beasts, improve by experience and learn the qualities of natural objects by observing their effects. when a child has felt pain from touching the flame of a candle, he will be careful not to put his hand near any candle, and will expect a similar effect from any cause that is similar in its appearance. if you assert that the child's understanding comes to this conclusion through a process of argument, it is fair for me to demand that you produce that argument, and you have no excuse for refusing to do so. you can't say that the argument has eluded you because it is so difficult and complex, because you have just said that a mere infant finds it easy! so if you hesitate for a moment, or if after reflection you produce any intricate or profound argument, you have in effect given up your side in this dispute: you have as good as admitted that it isn't through reasoning that we are led to suppose the future to resemble the past and to expect similar effects from apparently similar causes. this is the proposition that i intended to establish in the present section. if i'm right about it, i don't claim it as any great discovery. if i am wrong, then there is an argument from past to future which was perfectly familiar to me long before i was out of my cradle, yet now i can't discover it. what a backward scholar i must be!

section v.
notes the word power is here used in a loose and popular sense. using it more accurately would add strength to this argument. see section 7.

sceptical solution of these doubts.
section 5: sceptical solution of these doubts

part i. the passion for philosophy, like that for religion, seems liable to this inconvenience, that, though it aims at the correction of our manners, and extirpation of our vices, it may only serve, by imprudent management, to foster a predominant inclination, and push the mind, with more determined resolution, towards that side which already , only a more refined system of selfishness, and reason ourselves out of all virtue as well as social enjoyment. while we study with attention the vanity of human life, and turn all our thoughts towards the empty and transitory nature of riches and honours, we are, perhaps, all the while flattering our natural indolence, which, hating the bustle of the world, and drudgery of business, seeks a pretence of reason to give itself a full and uncontrolled indulgence. there is, however, one species of philosophy which seems little liable to this inconvenience, and that because it strikes in with no disorderly passion of the human mind, nor can mingle itself with any natural affection or propensity; and that is the academic or sceptical philosophy. the academics always talk of doubt and suspense of judgement, of danger in hasty determinations, of confining to very narrow bounds the enquiries of the understanding, and of renouncing all speculations which lie not within the limits of common life and practice. nothing, therefore, can be more contrary than such a philosophy to the supine indolence of the mind, its rash arrogance, its lofty pretensions, and its superstitious credulity. every passion is mortified by it, except the love of truth; and that passion never is, nor can be, carried to too high a degree. it is surprising, therefore, that this philosophy, which, in almost every instance, must be harmless and innocent, should be the subject of so much groundless reproach and obloquy. but, perhaps, the very circumstance which renders it so innocent is what chiefly exposes it to the public hatred and resentment. by flattering no irregular passion, it gains few partizans: by opposing so many vices and follies, it raises to itself abundance of enemies, who stigmatize it as libertine profane, and irreligious.
the passion for philosophy, like that for religion, involves a certain danger. although it aims to correct our behaviour and wipe out our vices, it may through not being handled properly end up merely encouraging us to carry on in directions that we're already naturally inclined to follow. we may set out to achieve philosophical wisdom and firmness, and to become satisfied with the pleasures of the mind as distinct from those of the body, yet reason ourselves out of all virtue as well as all social enjoyment, ending up with a philosophy which (like that of epictetus and other stoics) is only a more refined system of selfishness. while we meditate on the vanity of human life, and focus our thoughts on the empty and transitory nature of riches and honours, perhaps we are really just finding excuses for our idleness, trying to get reason's support for our lazy unwillingness to be busy in the world. however, one kind of philosophy seems to run little risk of this drawback, because it doesn't join forces with any disorderly passion of the human mind, and can't get mixed up with any of our natural tendencies or inclinations; and that is the sceptical philosophy. the sceptics always talk of doubt and suspending judgment, of the danger of deciding too quickly, of keeping intellectual enquiries within narrow limits, and of giving up all theorizing that isn't in touch with common life and practice. so their philosophy is as opposed as it could be to the mind's idleness, its rash arrogance, its grandiose claims, and its superstitious credulity. this philosophy has a humbling effect on every passion except the love of truth; and that could never be carried too far. given that this philosophy is almost always harmless and innocent, it's surprising that it should so often be criticized and stigmatized as libertine, profane, and irreligious. perhaps the very feature that makes it so innocent also brings hatred and resentment against it. it doesn't encourage any bad feelings or habits, so it has few supporters; but it does oppose many vices and follies, which is why it has so many enemies!

nor need we fear that this philosophy, while it endeavours to limit our enquiries to common life, should ever undermine the reasonings of common life, and carry its doubts so far as to destroy all action, as well as speculation. nature will always maintain her rights, and prevail in the end over any abstract reasoning whatsoever. though we should conclude, for instance, as in the foregoing section, that, in all reasonings from experience, there is a step taken by the mind which is not supported by any argument or process of the understanding; there is no danger that these reasonings, on which almost all knowledge depends, will ever be affected by such a discovery. if the mind be not engaged by argument to make this step, it must be induced by some other principle of equal weight and authority; and that principle will preserve its influence as long as human nature remains the same. what that principle is may well be worth the pains of enquiry.
when it tries to limit our enquiries to common life, this philosophy runs no risk of going too far and undermining the reasonings that we use in common life, pushing its doubts so far as to destroy all action and belief. nature will always maintain its rights, and prevail in the end over any abstract reasoning whatsoever. that is, we shall continue to think and act in the ways that our human nature dictates the ways that are natural to us with no risk of our being deflected from these by philosophical considerations. for example, i showed in the preceding section that whenever we reason from experience we take a step that isn't supported by any argument or intellectual considerations; but these experiential reasonings are the basis for almost all the knowledge we have, and there's no chance of their being dislodged by the discovery that they can't be justified by arguments. if we aren't led by argument to make inferences from past experience, we must be led by something else that is just as powerful some other force that will have power in our lives as long as human nature remains the same. it would be worthwhile to explore what that other force is.

suppose a person, though endowed with the strongest faculties of reason and reflection, to be brought on a sudden into this world; he would, indeed, immediately observe a continual succession of objects, and one event following another; but he would not be able to discover anything farther. he would not, at first, by any reasoning, be able to reach the idea of cause and effect; since the particular powers, by which all natural operations are performed, never appear to the senses; nor is it reasonable to conclude, merely because one event, in one instance, precedes another, that therefore the one is the cause, the other the effect. their conjunction may be arbitrary and casual. there may be no reason to infer the existence of one from the appearance of the other. and in a word, such a person, without more experience, could never employ his conjecture or reasoning concerning any matter of fact, or be assured of anything beyond what was immediately present to his memory and senses.
suppose that a highly intelligent and thoughtful person were suddenly brought into this world; he would immediately observe one event following another, but that is all he could discover. he wouldn't be able by any reasoning to reach the idea of cause and effect, because (firstly) the particular powers by which all natural operations are performed are never perceived through the senses, and (secondly) there is no reason to conclude that one event causes another merely because it precedes it. their occurring together may be arbitrary and casual, with no causal connection between them. in short, until such a person had more experience he could never reason about any matter of fact, or be sure of anything beyond what was immediately present to his memory and senses.

suppose, again, that he has acquired more experience, and has lived so long in the world as to have observed familiar objects or events to be constantly conjoined together; what is the consequence of this experience? he immediately infers the existence of one object from the appearance of the other. yet he has not, by all his experience, acquired any idea or knowledge of the secret power by which the one object produces the other; nor is it, by any process of reasoning, he is engaged to draw this inference. but still he finds himself determined to draw it: and though he should be convinced that his understanding has no part in the operation, he would nevertheless continue in the same course of thinking. there is some other principle which determines him to form such a conclusion.
now suppose that our person gains more experience, and lives long enough in the world to observe similar objects or events occurring together constantly; now what conclusion does he draw from this experience? he immediately infers the existence of one object from the appearance of the other! yet all his experience hasn't given him any idea or knowledge of the secret power by which one object produces another; nor can any process of reasoning have led him to draw this inference. but he finds that he can't help drawing it: and he won't be swayed from this even if he becomes convinced that there is no intellectual support for the inference. something else is at work, compelling him to go through with it.

this principle is custom or habit. for wherever the repetition of any particular act or operation produces a propensity to renew the same act or operation, without being impelled by any reasoning or process of the understanding, we always say, that this propensity is the effect of . by employing that word, we pretend not to have given the ultimate reason of such a propensity. we only point out a principle of human nature, which is universally acknowledged, and which is well known by its effects. perhaps we can push our enquiries no farther, or pretend to give the cause of this cause; but must rest contented with it as the ultimate principle, which we can assign, of all our conclusions from experience. it is sufficient satisfaction, that we can go so far, without repining at the narrowness of our faculties because they will carry us no farther. and it is certain we here advance a very intelligible proposition at least, if not a true one, when we assert that, after the constant conjunction of two objects heat and flame, for instance, weight and solidity we are determined by custom alone to expect the one from the appearance of the other. this hypothesis seems even the only one which explains the difficulty, why we draw, from a thousand instances, an inference which we are not able to draw from one instance, that is, in no respect, different from them. reason is incapable of any such variation. the conclusions which it draws from considering one circle are the same which it would form upon surveying all the circles in the universe. but no man, having seen only one body move after being impelled by another, could infer that every other body will move after a like impulse. all inferences from experience, therefore, are effects of custom, not of reasoning.
it is custom or habit. when we are inclined to behave or think in some way, not because it can be justified by reasoning or some process of the understanding but just because we have behaved or thought like that so often in the past, we always say that this inclination is the effect of custom. in using that word we don't claim to give the basic reason for the inclination. all we are doing is to point out a fundamental feature of human nature which everyone agrees is there, and which is well known by its effects. perhaps that is as far as we can go. perhaps, that is, we can't discover the cause of this cause, and must rest content with it as the deepest we can go in explaining our conclusions from experience. our ability to go that far should satisfy us; if our faculties won't take us any further, we oughtn't to complain about this. we do at least have here a very intelligible proposition and perhaps a true one: after the constant conjunction of two objects heat and flame, for instance, or weight and solidity sheer habit makes us expect the one when we experience the other. indeed, this hypothesis seems to be the only one that could explain why we draw from a thousand instances an inference which we can't draw from a single one that is exactly like each of the thousand. reason isn't like that. the conclusions it draws from considering one circle are the same as it would form after surveying all the circles in the universe. but no man, having seen only one body move after being pushed by another, could infer that every other body will move after a similar collision. all inferences from experience, therefore, are effects of custom and not of reasoning.

if we examine those arguments, which, in any of the sciences above mentioned, are supposed to be the mere effects of reasoning and reflection, they will be found to terminate, at last, in some general principle or conclusion, for which we can assign no reason but observation and experience. the only difference between them and those maxims, which are vulgarly esteemed the result of pure experience, is, that the former cannot be established without some process of thought, and some reflection on what we have observed, in order to distinguish its circumstances, and trace its consequences: whereas in the latter, the experienced event is exactly and fully familiar to that which we infer as the result of any particular situation. the history of a tiberius or a nero makes us dread a like tyranny, were our monarchs freed from the restraints of laws and senates: but the observation of any fraud or cruelty in private life is sufficient, with the aid of a little thought, to give us the same apprehension; while it serves as an instance of the general corruption of human nature, and shows us the danger which we must incur by reposing an entire confidence in mankind. in both cases, it is experience which is ultimately the foundation of our inference and conclusion.
if we examine (1) arguments like those i have mentioned, which are supposed to involve nothing but reasoning and reflection, they turn out to be relying on some general principle based solely on observation and experience. the only difference between them and (2) the maxims that are commonly thought to come from pure experience is that (1) cant be established without some process of thought some reflection on what we have observed, in order to sort out its details and trace its consequences whereas in (2) the experienced event is exactly like the one we predict on the new occasion. the fear that if our monarchs were freed from the restraints of laws they would become tyrants might be arrived at (2) through our knowledge of the history of tiberius or nero; or (1) through our experience of fraud or cruelty in private life, which with a little thought we can take as evidence of the general corruption of human nature and of the danger of putting too much trust in mankind. in each case the ultimate basis for the fear that we arrive at is experience.

there is no man so young and unexperienced, as not to have formed, from observation, many general and just maxims concerning human affairs and the conduct of life; but it must be confessed, that, when a man comes to put these in practice, he will be extremely liable to error, till time and farther experience both enlarge these maxims, and teach him their proper use and application. in every situation or incident, there are many particular and seemingly minute circumstances, which the man of greatest talent is, at first, apt to overlook, though on them the justness of his conclusions, and consequently the prudence of his conduct, entirely depend. not to mention, that, to a young beginner, the general observations and maxims occur not always on the proper occasions, nor can be immediately applied with due calmness and distinction. the truth is, an unexperienced reasoner could be no reasoner at all, were he absolutely unexperienced; and when we assign that character to any one, we mean it only in a comparative sense, and suppose him possessed of experience, in a smaller and more imperfect degree.
any man, however young and inexperienced, will have been led by his experience to many general truths about human affairs and the conduct of life; but he will be apt to go wrong in putting them into practice, until time and further experience have broadened the scope of these truths and taught him how to apply them. talented though he may be, he will be likely to overlook some apparently minor aspects of a situation which are in fact crucial to the conclusions he ought to draw and to how he ought to act. he must of course have had some experience. when we call someone an unexperienced reasoner, we mean only that he hasn't had much experience.

without the influence of custom, we should be entirely ignorant of every matter of fact beyond what is immediately present to the memory and senses. we should never know how to adjust means to ends, or to employ our natural powers in the production of any effect. there would be an end at once of all action, as well as of the chief part of speculation.
custom, then, is the great guide of human life. it alone is what makes our experience useful to us, and makes us expect future sequences of events to be like ones that have appeared in the past. without the influence of custom, we would be entirely ignorant of every matter of fact beyond what is immediately present to the memory and senses. we would never know what means we should adopt in order to reach our ends; we couldn't employ our natural powers to produce any desired effect. there would be an end of all action and of most theorizing.

but here it may be proper to remark, that though our conclusions from experience carry us beyond our memory and senses, and assure us of matters of fact which happened in the most distant places and most remote ages, yet some fact must always be present to the senses or memory, from which we may first proceed in drawing these conclusions. a man, who should find in a desert country the remains of pompous buildings, would conclude that the country had, in ancient times, been cultivated by civilized inhabitants; but did nothing of this nature occur to him, he could never form such an inference. we learn the events of former ages from history; but then we must peruse the volumes in which this instruction is contained, and thence carry up our inferences from one testimony to another, till we arrive at the eyewitnesses and spectators of these distant events. in a word, if we proceed not upon some fact, present to the memory or senses, our reasonings would be merely hypothetical; and however the particular links might be connected with each other, the whole chain of inferences would have nothing to support it, nor could we ever, by its means, arrive at the knowledge of any real existence. if i ask why you believe any particular matter of fact, which you relate, you must tell me some reason; and this reason will be some other fact, connected with it. but as you cannot proceed after this manner, , you must at last terminate in some fact, which is present to your memory or senses; or must allow that your belief is entirely without foundation.
i should point out, however, that although our inferences from experience carry us beyond our memory and senses, and assure us of matters of fact that happened in distant places and at remote times, any such inference must start with a fact that is present to the senses or memory. a man who found in a desert country the remains of magnificent buildings would conclude that the country had long before had civilized inhabitants; but without the initial experience he could never infer this. we learn the events of bygone ages from history; but to do this we must read the books that give the information, and carry out inferences from one report to another, until finally we arrive at the eye-witnesses and spectators of these distant events. in short, if we didn't start with some fact that is present to the memory or senses, our reasonings would be merely hypothetical; and however strong the particular links might be, the whole chain of inferences would have nothing to support it, and we couldn't use it to arrive at knowledge of any real existence. if i ask why you believe any particular matter of fact that you tell me of, you must tell me some reason; and this reason will be some other fact connected with it. but you can't go on like this for ever: eventually you must end up with some fact that is present to your memory or senses or else admit that your belief has no foundation at all.

what, then, is the conclusion of the whole matter? a simple one; though, it must be confessed, pretty remote from the common theories of philosophy. all belief of matter of fact or real existence is derived merely from some object, present to the memory or senses, and a customary conjunction between that and some other object. or in other words; having found, in many instances, that any two kinds of objects flame and heat, snow and cold have always been conjoined together; if flame or snow be presented anew to the senses, the mind is carried by custom to expect heat or cold, and to  that such a quality does exist, and will discover itself upon a nearer approach. this belief is the necessary result of placing the mind in such circumstances. it is an operation of the soul, when we are so situated, as unavoidable as to feel the passion of love, when we receive benefits; or hatred, when we meet with injuries. all these operations are a species of natural instincts, which no reasoning or process of the thought and understanding is able either to produce or to prevent.
what are we to conclude from all this? something that is far removed from the common theories of philosophy, yet is very simple: all beliefs about matters of fact or real existence are derived merely from something that is present to the memory or senses, and a customary association of that with some other thing. or in other words: having found in many cases that two kinds of objects flame and heat, snow and cold have always gone together, and being presented with a new instance of flame or snow, the mind's habits lead it to expect heat or cold and to believe that heat or cold exists now and will be experienced if one comes closer. this belief is the inevitable result of placing the mind in such circumstances. that our minds should react in that way in those circumstances is as unavoidable as that we should feel love when we receive benefits, or hatred when we are deliberately harmed. these operations of the soul are a kind of natural instinct, which no reasoning or process of the thought and understanding can either produce or prevent.

at this point, it would be very allowable for us to stop our philosophical researches. in most questions we can never make a single step farther; and in all questions we must terminate here at last, after our most restless and curious enquiries. but still our curiosity will be pardonable, perhaps commendable, if it carry us on to still farther researches, and make us examine more accurately the nature of this , whence it is derived. by this means we may meet with some explications and analogies that will give satisfaction; at least to such as love the abstract sciences, and can be entertained with speculations, which, however accurate, may still retain a degree of doubt and uncertainty. as to readers of a different taste; the remaining part of this section is not calculated for them, and the following enquiries may well be understood, though it be neglected.
at this point we could reasonably allow ourselves to stop our philosophical researches. in most questions, we can never make a single step further; and in all questions, we must eventually stop, after our most restless and probing enquiries. but still our curiosity will be pardonable, perhaps commendable, if it carries us on to still further researches, and makes us examine more accurately the nature of this belief, and of the customary conjunction from which it is derived. this may bring us to some explanations and analogies that will give satisfaction at least to those who love the abstract sciences and can enjoy speculations which, however accurate, may still retain a degree of doubt and uncertainty. as to readers whose tastes are different from that: part 2 of this section is not addressed to them, and can be neglected without harm to their understanding of the rest.

part ii.
part 2

nothing is more free than the imagination of man; and though it cannot exceed that original stock of ideas furnished by the internal and external senses, it has unlimited power of mixing, compounding, separating, and dividing these ideas, in all the varieties of fiction and vision. it can feign a train of events, with all the appearance of reality, ascribe to them a particular time and place, conceive them as existent, and paint them out to itself with every circumstance, that belongs to any historical fact, which it believes with the greatest certainty. wherein, therefore, consists the difference between such a fiction and belief? it lies not merely in any peculiar idea, which is annexed to such a conception as commands our assent, and which is wanting to every known fiction. for as the mind has authority over all its ideas, it could voluntarily annex this particular idea to any fiction, and consequently be able to believe whatever it pleases; contrary to what we find by daily experience. we can, in our conception, join the head of a man to the body of a horse; but it is not in our power to believe that such an animal has ever really existed.
nothing is more free than the imagination of man; and though it is confined to the original stock of ideas provided by the internal and external senses, it has unlimited power to mix, combine, separate and divide these ideas, in all the varieties of fiction and vision it can invent a sequence of events, with all the appearance of reality, ascribe to them a particular time and place, conceive them as really happening, and depict them to itself with as much detail as it could any historical event which it believes with the greatest certainty to have really happened. what, then, is the difference between such a fiction and belief? it is not this: there is one special idea that is joined to every proposition that we assent to and not to any that we regard as fictional. the reason why that is a wrong account is that the mind has authority over all its ideas, so that if this one special idea existed the mind could voluntarily join it to any fiction, and consequently according to this account it would be able to believe anything it chose to believe; and we find by daily experience that it cannot. we can in putting thoughts together join the head of a man to the body of a horse; but we can't choose to believe that such an animal has ever really existed.

it follows, therefore, that the difference between  lies in some sentiment or feeling, which is annexed to the latter, not to the former, and which depends not on the will, nor can be commanded at pleasure. it must be excited by nature, like all other sentiments; and must arise from the particular situation, in which the mind is placed at any particular juncture. whenever any object is presented to the memory or senses, it immediately, by the force of custom, carries the imagination to conceive that object, which is usually conjoined to it; and this conception is attended with a feeling or sentiment, different from the loose reveries of the fancy. in this consists the whole nature of belief. for as there is no matter of fact which we believe so firmly that we cannot conceive the contrary, there would be no difference between the conception assented to and that which is rejected, were it not for some sentiment which distinguishes the one from the other. if i see a billiard-ball moving towards another, on a smooth table, i can easily conceive it to stop upon contact. this conception implies no contradiction; but still it feels very differently from that conception by which i represent to myself the impulse and the communication of motion from one ball to another.
it follows that the difference between fiction and belief lies in some sentiment or feeling that goes with belief and not with fiction a feeling that doesn't depend on the will and can't be commanded at pleasure. it must be caused by nature, like all other sentiments; and must arise from the particular situation that the mind is in at that particular moment. whenever any object is presented to the memory or to the senses, it immediately leads the imagination by the force of custom to conceive the object that is usually conjoined to it; and this conception comes with a feeling or sentiment that is different from anything accompanying the loose daydreams of the imagination. that is all there is to belief. for as there is no matter of fact that we believe so firmly that we can't conceive the contrary, there would be no difference between the conception assented to and that which is rejected if there weren't some feeling or sentiment that distinguishes the one from the other. if i see a billiard-ball moving towards another on a smooth table, i can easily conceive it to stop on contact. this conception implies no contradiction; but still it feels very different from the conception by which i represent to myself the collision followed by the passing on of motion from one ball to the other.

let us, then, take in the whole compass of this doctrine, and allow, that the sentiment of belief is nothing but a conception more intense and steady than what attends the mere fictions of the imagination, and that this  of conception arises from a customary conjunction of the object with something present to the memory or senses: i believe that it will not be difficult, upon these suppositions, to find other operations of the mind analogous to it, and to trace up these phenomena to principles still more general.
belief is nothing but a more vivid, lively, forcible, firm, steady conception of an object than any that the unaided imagination can ever attain.

we have already observed that nature has established connexions among particular ideas, and that no sooner one idea occurs to our thoughts than it introduces its correlative, and carries our attention towards it, by a gentle and insensible movement. these principles of connexion or association we have reduced to three, namely, ; which are the only bonds that unite our thoughts together, and beget that regular train of reflection or discourse, which, in a greater or less degree, takes place among all mankind. now here arises a question, on which the solution of the present difficulty will depend. does it happen, in all these relations, that, when one of the objects is presented to the senses or memory, the mind is not only carried to the conception of the correlative, but reaches a steadier and stronger conception of it than what otherwise it would have been able to attain? this seems to be the case with that belief which arises from the relation of cause and effect. and if the case be the same with the other relations or principles of associations, this may be established as a general law, which takes place in all the operations of the mind.
let us, then, take in this doctrine in its full scope, and agree that the sentiment of belief is nothing but a conception that is more intense and steady than conceptions that are mere fictions of the imagination, and this manner of conception arises from a customary conjunction of the object with something present to the memory or senses. it will not be hard, i think, to find other operations of the mind analogous to belief (on this account of it), and to bring these phenomena under still more general principles. i have already remarked that nature has established connections among particular ideas, and that no sooner has one idea occurred to our thoughts than it introduces its correlative i.e. the idea that nature has connected with it and carries our attention towards it by a gentle and imperceptible movement. these natural principles of connection or association come down to three basic ones, namely, resemblance, contiguity, and causation. these three are the only bonds that unite our thoughts together, and generate that regular sequence of thought or talk that takes place among all mankind to a greater or lesser degree. now a question arises on which the solution of the present difficulty will depend. does it happen with each of these relations that, when an object is presented to the senses or memory the mind is not only carried to the conception of the correlative, but comes to have a belief in it, that is, a steadier and stronger conception of it than it would it would otherwise have been able to attain? this seems to be what happens when beliefs arise from the relation of cause and effect. if it also holds for the other two relations or principles of association, this will be established as a general law that holds in all the operations of the mind.

we may, therefore, observe, as the first experiment to our present purpose, that, upon the appearance of the picture of an absent friend, our idea of him is evidently enlivened by the , and that every passion, which that idea occasions, whether of joy or sorrow, acquires new force and vigour. in producing this effect, there concur both a relation and a present impression. where the picture bears him no resemblance, at least was not intended for him, it never so much as conveys our thought to him: and where it is absent, as well as the person, though the mind may pass from the thought of the one to that of the other, it feels its idea to be rather weakened than enlivened by that transition. we take a pleasure in viewing the picture of a friend, when it is set before us; but when it is removed, rather choose to consider him directly than by reflection in an image, which is equally distant and obscure.
as the first relevant experiment, let us notice that when we see the picture of an absent friend, our idea of him is evidently enlivened by the picture's resemblance to him, and that every feeling that our idea of him produces, whether of joy or sorrow, acquires new force and vigour. this effect is produced by the joint operation of a relation of resemblance and a present impression. if the picture doesn't resemble him, or at least wasn't intended to be of him, it doesn't convey our thought to him at all. and when the picture and the person are both absent from us, though the mind may pass from the thought of the one to that of the other it feels its idea of the person to be weakened rather than strengthened by that transition. we take pleasure in viewing the picture of a friend, when it is set before us; but when it is not in our presence we would prefer considering him directly to considering him through a likeness of him that is both distant and dim.

the ceremonies of the roman catholic religion may be considered as instances of the same nature. the devotees of that superstition usually plead in excuse for the mummeries, with which they are upbraided, that they feel the good effect of those external motions, and postures, and actions, in enlivening their devotion and quickening their fervour, which otherwise would decay, if directed entirely to distant and immaterial objects. we shadow out the objects of our faith, say they, in sensible types and images, and render them more present to us by the immediate presence of these types, than it is possible for us to do merely by an intellectual view and contemplation. sensible objects have always a greater influence on the fancy than any other; and this influence they readily convey to those ideas to which they are related, and which they resemble. i shall only infer from these practices, and this reasoning, that the effect of resemblance in enlivening the ideas is very common; and as in every case a resemblance and a present impression must concur, we are abundantly supplied with experiments to prove the reality of the foregoing principle.
the ceremonies of the roman catholic religion can be considered as instances of this phenomenon. when the devotees of that superstition are reproached for the ridiculous ceremonies it has them perform, they usually plead in their defence that they feel the good effect of those external motions and postures and actions, in enlivening their devotion and intensifying their fervour, which would decay if it were directed entirely to distant and immaterial objects such as god. we portray the objects of our faith, they say, in perceptible pictures and images; and the immediate presence of these pictures makes the objects more present to us than they could be merely through an intellectual view and contemplation. perceptible objects always have a greater influence on the imagination that anything else does, and they readily convey this influence to the ideas to which they are related and which they resemble. all that i shall infer from these practices and this reasoning is that the effect of resemblance in enlivening ideas is very common; and because in every case a resemblance and a present impression must both be at work, we are supplied with plenty of empirical examples that support the truth of the foregoing principle.

we may add force to these experiments by others of a different kind, in considering the effects of . it is certain that distance diminishes the force of every idea, and that, upon our approach to any object; though it does not discover itself to our senses; it operates upon the mind with an influence, which imitates an immediate impression. the thinking on any object readily transports the mind to what is contiguous; but it is only the actual presence of an object, that transports it with a superior vivacity. when i am a few miles from home, whatever relates to it touches me more nearly than when i am two hundred leagues distant; though even at that distance the reflecting on any thing in the neighbourhood of my friends or family naturally produces an idea of them. but as in this latter case, both the objects of the mind are ideas; notwithstanding there is an easy transition between them; that transition alone is not able to give a superior vivacity to any of the ideas, for want of some immediate impression.
we may add force to these examples by others of a different kind, bringing in the effects of contiguity as well as of resemblance. it is certain that distance diminishes the force of every idea, and that as we get nearer to some object even though our senses don't show it to us its influence on the mind comes to be like the influence of an immediate sensory impression. thinking about an object readily transports the mind to things that are contiguous to it; but it's only the actual presence of an object that transports the mind with a greater liveliness. when i am a few miles from home, whatever relates to it touches me more nearly than when i am two hundred leagues away, though even at that distance reflecting on anything in the neighbourhood of my friends or family naturally produces an idea of them. but in cases like this, both the objects of the mind what it is carried from and what it is carried to are ideas and not the livelier kind of perception that we call impressions. although there is an easy transition between them, that transition alone can't give either of them a liveliness greater than ideas have; and the reason for that is that in these cases no immediate impression is at work.

no one can doubt but causation has the same influence as the other two relations of resemblance and contiguity. superstitious people are fond of the reliques of saints and holy men, for the same reason, that they seek after types or images, in order to enliven their devotion, and give them a more intimate and strong conception of those exemplary lives, which they desire to imitate. now it is evident, that one of the best reliques, which a devotee could procure, would be the handywork of a saint; and if his cloaths and furniture are ever to be considered in this light, it is because they were once at his disposal, and were moved and affected by him; in which respect they are to be considered as imperfect effects, and as connected with him by a shorter chain of consequences than any of those, by which we learn the reality of his existence.
no-one can doubt that causation has the same influence as the other two relations, resemblance and contiguity. superstitious people are fond of the relics of saints and holy men for the same reason that they like to have pictures or images namely to enliven their devotion and give them a more intimate and strong conception of those exemplary lives that they desire to imitate. now it's evident that one of the best relics that a devotee could procure would be something made by a saint; and if his clothes and furniture are ever considered in this light, it is because they were once at his disposal and were moved and affected by him. this lets us consider them as imperfect effects of the saint; imperfect because he didn't cause them to exist, but merely caused them to go through various vicissitudes while they were in his possession. they are connected with him by a shorter chain of consequences than any of the things human testimony, gravestones, written records, etc. by which we learn the reality of his existence.

suppose, that the son of a friend, who had been long dead or absent, were presented to us; it is evident, that this object would instantly revive its correlative idea, and recal to our thoughts all past intimacies and familiarities, in more lively colours than they would otherwise have appeared to us. this is another phaenomenon, which seems to prove the principle above mentioned.
suppose we encounter the son of a friend of ours who has been long dead or absent; it's evident that this object (the son) would instantly revive its correlative idea (namely, the idea of our friend), and recall to our thoughts all our past intimacies and familiarities with the friend, in more lively colours than they would otherwise have appeared to us. this is another phenomenon that seems to prove the above-mentioned principle.

we may observe, that, in these phaenomena, the belief of the correlative object is always presupposed; without which the relation could have no effect. the influence of the picture supposes, that we  that it really exists. now i assert, that this belief, where it reaches beyond the memory or senses, is of a similar nature, and arises from similar causes, with the transition of thought and vivacity of conception here explained. when i throw a piece of dry wood into a fire, my mind is immediately carried to conceive, that it augments, not extinguishes the flame. this transition of thought from the cause to the effect proceeds not from reason. it derives its origin altogether from custom and experience. and as it first begins from an object, present to the senses, it renders the idea or conception of flame more strong and lively than any loose, floating reverie of the imagination. that idea arises immediately. the thought moves instantly towards it, and conveys to it all that force of conception, which is derived from the impression present to the senses. when a sword is levelled at my breast, does not the idea of wound and pain strike me more strongly, than when a glass of wine is presented to me, even though by accident this idea should occur after the appearance of the latter object? but what is there in this whole matter to cause such a strong conception, except only a present object and a customary transition to the idea of another object, which we have been accustomed to conjoin with the former? this is the whole operation of the mind, in all our conclusions concerning matter of fact and existence; and it is a satisfaction to find some analogies, by which it may be explained. the transition from a present object does in all cases give strength and solidity to the related idea.
notice that in each of these phenomena the person believes that the correlative object does or did exist. without that the relation could have no effect. the influence of the picture requires that we believe our friend to have once existed. being close to home can never stir up our ideas of home unless we believe that home really exists. now i assert that this belief, where it reaches beyond the memory or senses, is of a similar sort and arises from similar causes as the transition of thought and liveliness of conception that i have just been explaining. when i throw a piece of dry wood into a fire, my mind is immediately carried to a thought of it as making the flame grow, not as extinguishing it. this transition of thought from the cause to the effect doesn't come from reason. its sole origin is custom and experience. and as it first begins from an object that is present to the senses when i see the dry wood go into the fire, it makes the idea or conception of flame more strong and lively than it would be in any loose, floating reverie of the imagination. that idea of the increased flame arises immediately. the thought moves instantly towards it, and conveys to it all the force of conception that comes from the impression present to the senses. it might happen by accident that when a glass of wine is presented to me my next ideas are those of wound and pain; but they will not occur as strongly as they would if i had been presented with a sword levelled at my chest! but what is there in this whole matter to cause such a strong conception apart from a present object and a customary transition to the idea of another object, which we have been accustomed to conjoin with the former? this is all that our mind does in all our inferences concerning matters of fact and existence; and it is satisfactory to have found some analogies through which it can be explained. in every case, the transition from a present object gives strength and solidity to the related idea to which the transition is made.

i shall add, for a further confirmation of the foregoing theory, that, as this operation of the mind, by which we infer like effects from like causes, and , is so essential to the subsistence of all human creatures, it is not probable, that it could be trusted to the fallacious deductions of our reason, which is slow in its operations; appears not, in any degree, during the first years of infancy; and at best is, in every age and period of human life, extremely liable to error and mistake. it is more conformable to the ordinary wisdom of nature to secure so necessary an act of the mind, by some instinct or mechanical tendency, which may be infallible in its operations, may discover itself at the first appearance of life and thought, and may be independent of all the laboured deductions of the understanding. as nature has taught us the use of our limbs, without giving us the knowledge of the muscles and nerves, by which they are actuated; so has she implanted in us an instinct, which carries forward the thought in a correspondent course to that which she has established among external objects; though we are ignorant of those powers and forces, on which this regular course and succession of objects totally depends.
here is a point that further confirms the theory i have offered. this operation of the mind in which we infer like effects from like causes, and vice versa, is so essential to our survival that it probably couldn't have been entrusted to the fallacious deductions of our reason. for reason is slow in its operations; very little of it appears in early infancy; and at best even in adults it is extremely liable to error and mistake. it fits better with the ordinary wisdom of nature that such a necessary an act of the mind should be secured by some instinct or automatic tendency, which can be infallible in its operations, present when life and thought first appear, and independent of all the laborious deductions of the understanding. as nature has taught us the use of our limbs without giving us knowledge of the muscles and nerves by which they are moved, so she has implanted in us an instinct that carries our thought forward along a course corresponding to the course she has established among external objects though we are ignorant of those powers and forces on which this regular course and succession of objects totally depends.

section vi.
notes

of probability.
section 6: probability

mr. locke divides all arguments into demonstrative and probable. in this view, we must say, that it is only probable all men must die, or that the sun will rise to-morrow. but to conform our language more to common use, we ought to divide arguments into . by proofs meaning such arguments from experience as leave no room for doubt or opposition. though there be no such thing as  in the world; our ignorance of the real cause of any event has the same influence on the understanding, and begets a like species of belief or opinion.
even if there were no such thing as chance in the world, our ignorance of the real cause of any event has the same effect on the understanding, and generates the same kinds of belief or opinion, as knowledge about chances does.

there is certainly a probability, which arises from a superiority of chances on any side; and according as this superiority encreases, and surpasses the opposite chances, the probability receives a proportionable encrease, and begets still a higher degree of belief or assent to that side, in which we discover the superiority. if a dye were marked with one figure or number of spots on four sides, and with another figure or number of spots on the two remaining sides, it would be more probable, that the former would turn up than the latter; though, if it had a thousand sides marked in the same manner, and only one side different, the probability would be much higher, and our belief or expectation of the event more steady and secure. this process of the thought or reasoning may seem trivial and obvious; but to those who consider it more narrowly, it may, perhaps, afford matter for curious speculation.
it can certainly happen that an outcome is probable because the chances of its occurring are greater than the chances of its not occurring; and the probability is greater and the corresponding belief or assent stronger in proportion as those chances exceed the chances of the outcome's not occurring. if a die were marked with two spots on four of its sides and with three spots on the two remaining sides, then it would be more probable that when the die was thrown it would turn up two than that it would turn up three. if it had a thousand sides, with 999 of them marked with two spots and the remaining one side marked with three spots, the probability of its turning up two would be much higher, and our belief or expectation of that outcome would be more steady and secure. this process of thought or reasoning may seem trivial and obvious, but it offers plenty to think about for those who attend to it carefully.

it seems evident, that, when the mind looks forward to discover the event, which may result from the throw of such a dye, it considers the turning up of each particular side as alike probable; and this is the very nature of chance, to render all the particular events, comprehended in it, entirely equal. but finding a greater number of sides concur in the one event than in the other, the mind is carried more frequently to that event, and meets it oftener, in revolving the various possibilities or chances, on which the ultimate result depends. this concurrence of several views in one particular event begets immediately, by an inexplicable contrivance of nature, the sentiment of belief, and gives that event the advantage over its antagonist, which is supported by a smaller number of views, and recurs less frequently to the mind. if we allow, that belief is nothing but a firmer and stronger conception of an object than what attends the mere fictions of the imagination, this operation may, perhaps, in some measure, be accounted for. the concurrence of these several views or glimpses imprints the idea more strongly on the imagination; gives it superior force and vigour; renders its influence on the passions and affections more sensible; and in a word, begets that reliance or security, which constitutes the nature of belief and opinion.
it seems clear that when the mind looks to the future to learn which outcome will result from the throw of such a die, it considers the turning up of each particular side as equally probable; and this is the very nature of chance, to render all the particular outcomes that it covers entirely equal. but the mind, finding that a greater number of sides involve one outcome (turning up two) than in the other (turning up three), is carried more frequently to the former outcome, and meets it oftener in revolving the various possibilities or chances on which the ultimate result depends. this situation in which several views involve one particular outcome immediately generates by an inexplicable contrivance of nature the sentiment of belief, and gives that outcome the advantage over its antagonist, which is supported by a smaller number of views and crops up frequently in the mind. although i have called it inexplicable, this operation may perhaps be in some measure accounted for if we allow that belief is nothing but a firmer and stronger conception of an object than what accompanies the mere fictions of the imagination. the combination of these several views or glimpses imprints the idea more strongly on the imagination; gives it superior force and vigour; renders its influence on the passions and affections more obvious; and, in short, creates that reliance or security which constitutes the nature of belief and opinion.

the case is the same with the probability of causes, as with that of chance. there are some causes, which are entirely uniform and constant in producing a particular effect; and no instance has ever yet been found of any failure or irregularity in their operation. fire has always burned, and water suffocated every human creature: the production of motion by impulse and gravity is an universal law, which has hitherto admitted of no exception. but there are other causes, which have been found more irregular and uncertain; nor has rhubarb always proved a purge, or opium a soporific to every one, who has taken these medicines. it is true, when any cause fails of producing its usual effect, philosophers ascribe not this to any irregularity in nature; but suppose, that some secret causes, in the particular structure of parts, have prevented the operation. our reasonings, however, and conclusions concerning the event are the same as if this principle had no place. being determined by custom to transfer the past to the future, in all our inferences; where the past has been entirely regular and uniform, we expect the event with the greatest assurance, and leave no room for any contrary supposition. but where different effects have been found to follow from causes, which are to  and give its object the preference above the contrary event, which is not supported by an equal number of experiments, and recurs not so frequently to the thought in transferring the past to the future. let any one try to account for this operation of the mind upon any of the received systems of philosophy, and he will be sensible of the difficulty. for my part, i shall think it sufficient, if the present hints excite the curiosity of philosophers, and make them sensible how defective all common theories are in treating of such curious and such sublime subjects.
with the probability of causes the situation is the same as it is with the probability of chance. some causes are entirely uniform and constant in producing a particular kind of effect, with no instance having ever been found of any failure or irregularity in their operation. fire has always burned, and water has always suffocated, every human creature. the production of motion by impact and gravity is a universal law which up to now has had no exceptions. but other causes have been found to be more irregular and uncertain: rhubarb hasn't always worked as a purge, or opium as a soporific, on everyone who has taken these medicines. it is true that when any cause fails to produce its usual effect, scientists don't ascribe this to any irregularity in nature; but rather suppose that some secret causes in the particular structure of parts have prevented the operation. but our reasonings about the outcome are the same as if this principle concerning secret causes didn't apply. custom has determined us to transfer the past to the future in all our inferences; so where the past has been entirely regular and uniform, we expect the usual outcome with the greatest confidence, and leave no room for any contrary supposition. but where different effects have been found to follow from causes that appear exactly alike, all these various effects must occur to the mind when it moves from the past to the future, and must enter into our thoughts when we estimate the probability of an outcome. though we give preference to the one that has been found to be the most usual, and believe that this effect will occur this time too, we have to take into account the other effects, assigning to each a particular weight and authority in proportion as we have found it to be more or less frequent. in almost every country of europe it is more probable that there will be frost some time in january than that the weather will continue frost-free throughout that whole month; though this probability varies according to the different climates, and comes near to certainty in the more northern kingdoms. here then it seems evident that when we transfer the past to the future in order to predict the effect that will result from any cause, we transfer all the different outcomes in the same proportion as they have appeared in the past, and conceive (for instance) one to have existed a hundred times, another ten times, and another once. as a great number of views here point to one outcome, they fortify and confirm it to the imagination, generate the sentiment that we call belief, and make us prefer that outcome to the contrary one that isn't supported by as many experiences and doesn't show up so frequently in our thought in transferring the past to the future. try to account for this operation of the mind on the basis of any of the received systems of philosophy and you will become aware of the difficulty. for my part, i shall be satisfied if the hints that i have given arouse the curiosity of philosophers, and make them aware of how defective all common theories are in their treatments of these interesting and elevated subjects.

section vii.
notes

part i.
section 7: the idea of necessary connection

the great advantage of the mathematical sciences above the moral consists in this, that the ideas of the former, being sensible, are always clear and determinate, the smallest distinction between them is immediately perceptible, and the same terms are still expressive of the same ideas, without ambiguity or variation. an oval is never mistaken for a circle, nor an hyperbola for an ellipsis. the isosceles and scalenum are distinguished by boundaries more exact than vice and virtue, right and wrong. if any term be defined in geometry, the mind readily, of itself, substitutes, on all occasions, the definition for the term defined: or even when no definition is employed, the object itself may be presented to the senses, and by that means be steadily and clearly apprehended. but the finer sentiments of the mind, the operations of the understanding, the various agitations of the passions, though really in themselves distinct, easily escape us, when surveyed by reflection; nor is it in our power to recal the original object, as often as we have occasion to contemplate it. ambiguity, by this means, is gradually introduced into our reasonings: similar objects are readily taken to be the same: and the conclusion becomes at last very wide of the premises.
the mathematical sciences have a great advantage over the sciences that deal with human nature, namely that the ideas of the former because they come from the senses are always clear and determinate, the smallest distinction between them is immediately perceptible, and the same terms continue to stand for the same ideas without ambiguity or variation. an oval is never mistaken for a circle, nor a hyperbola for an ellipse. the isosceles and scalenon triangles are distinguished by boundaries more exact than those between vice and virtue, right and wrong. when a term is defined in geometry, the mind always promptly substitutes the definition for the term defined. and even when no definition is employed, the object itself may be presented to the senses and by that means be clearly and firmly grasped. but the more subtle sentiments of the mind, the operations of the understanding, the various agitations of the passions, though really in themselves distinct from one another, easily escape us when we reflectively look in on them; and we are not able to recall the original object every time we have occasion to think about it. ambiguity, by this means, is gradually introduced into our reasonings; similar objects are readily taken to be the same; and eventually the conclusion goes far beyond the premises.

one may safely, however, affirm, that, if we consider these sciences in a proper light, their advantages and disadvantages nearly compensate each other, and reduce both of them to a state of equality. if the mind, with greater facility, retains the ideas of geometry clear and determinate, it must carry on a much longer and more intricate chain of reasoning, and compare ideas much wider of each other, in order to reach the abstruser truths of that science. and if moral ideas are apt, without extreme care, to fall into obscurity and confusion, the inferences are always much shorter in these disquisitions, and the intermediate steps, which lead to the conclusion, much fewer than in the sciences which treat of quantity and number. in reality, there is scarcely a proposition in euclid so simple, as not to consist of more parts, than are to be found in any moral reasoning which runs not into chimera and conceit. where we trace the principles of the human mind through a few steps, we may be very well satisfied with our progress; considering how soon nature throws a bar to all our enquiries concerning causes, and reduces us to an acknowledgment of our ignorance. the chief obstacle, therefore, to our improvement in the moral or metaphysical sciences is the obscurity of the ideas, and ambiguity of the terms. the principal difficulty in the mathematics is the length of inferences and compass of thought, requisite to the forming of any conclusion. and, perhaps, our progress in natural philosophy is chiefly retarded by the want of proper experiments and phaenomena, which are often discovered by chance, and cannot always be found, when requisite, even by the most diligent and prudent enquiry. as moral philosophy seems hitherto to have received less improvement than either geometry or physics, we may conclude, that, if there be any difference in this respect among these sciences, the difficulties, which obstruct the progress of the former, require superior care and capacity to be surmounted.
still, it's safe to say that if we consider these sciences in a proper light we'll see that their respective advantages and disadvantages make them nearly equal. although the mind more easily retains clear and determinate ideas in geometry, it must carry on a much longer and more intricate chain of reasoning, and compare ideas that are much wider of each other, in order to reach the abstruser truths of that science. on the other side, although ideas relating to human nature are likely, if we aren't extremely careful, to fall into obscurity and confusion, the inferences are always much shorter in these enquiries, with far fewer steps from premises to conclusion than in the sciences that treat of quantity and number. almost every proposition in euclid's geometry consists of more parts than are to be found in any fully coherent reasoning about human nature. when we trace the principles of the human mind through a few steps, we can be well satisfied with our progress, considering how soon nature puts up barriers to all our enquiries into causes, and reduces us to admitting our ignorance. thus, the chief obstacle to our making advances in the human or metaphysical sciences is the obscurity of the ideas and the ambiguity of the terms. the principal difficulty in mathematics is the length of inferences and scope of thought needed for reaching any conclusion. and it may be that what chiefly holds back our progress in natural science is the lack of relevant experiments and phenomena, which are often found only by chance, and sometimes when they are needed can't be found at all, even by the most persistent and careful enquiry. as the study of human nature seems until now to have advanced less than either geometry or physics, we may conclude that if there is any difference in this respect among these sciences, the difficulties that obstruct the progress of the human sciences require the greater care and skill to be surmounted.

there are no ideas, which occur in metaphysics, more obscure and uncertain, than those of , of which it is every moment necessary for us to treat in all our disquisitions. we shall, therefore, endeavour, in this section, to fix, if possible, the precise meaning of these terms, and thereby remove some part of that obscurity, which is so much complained of in this species of philosophy.
of all the ideas that occur in metaphysics, none are more obscure and uncertain than those of power, force, energy or necessary connection, which we have to employ at every moment in our enquiries. so i'll try in this section to fix (as far as possible) the precise meaning of these terms, thereby removing some of the obscurity that is so much complained of in this kind of philosophy.

it seems a proposition, which will not admit of much dispute, that all our ideas are nothing but copies of our impressions, or, in other words, that it is impossible for us to , either by our external or internal senses. i have endeavoured to explain and prove this proposition, and have expressed my hopes, that, by a proper application of it, men may reach a greater clearness and precision in philosophical reasonings, than what they have hitherto been able to attain. complex ideas may, perhaps, be well known by definition, which is nothing but an enumeration of those parts or simple ideas, that compose them. but when we have pushed up definitions to the most simple ideas, and find still some ambiguity and obscurity; what resource are we then possessed of? by what invention can we throw light upon these ideas, and render them altogether precise and determinate to our intellectual view? produce the impressions or original sentiments, from which the ideas are copied. these impressions are all strong and sensible. they admit not of ambiguity. they are not only placed in a full light themselves, but may throw light on their correspondent ideas, which lie in obscurity. and by this means, we may, perhaps, attain a new microscope or species of optics, by which, in the moral sciences, the most minute, and most simple ideas may be so enlarged as to fall readily under our apprehension, and be equally known with the grossest and most sensible ideas, that can be the object of our enquiry.
it seems that there won't be much dispute about this proposition: all our ideas are merely copies of our impressions, so it is impossible for us to think of anything that we haven't previously felt through either our external or our internal senses. i tried in section 2 to explain and prove this proposition, expressing my hope that by applying it properly men may make their philosophical reasonings clearer and more precise than ever before. perhaps complex ideas can be well known by definition, for a definition merely enumerates the parts or simple ideas that make up the defined idea. but when we have pushed definitions back to the most simple ideas, and still find some ambiguity and obscurity, where can we turn for help? what technique can we use to throw light on these ideas and give our minds an altogether precise and determinate grasp of them? the answer is that we can produce the impressions or original sentiments, from which the ideas are copied. these impressions are all strong and sensible. there can be no ambiguity in them. they are not only placed in a full light themselves, but may throw light on the corresponding ideas that lie in the dark. perhaps by this means we can come to have a new microscope, so to speak, through which in the human sciences the smallest and simplest ideas can be enlarged enough to be readily grasped and to be as well known as the biggest and most sensible ideas that we can enquire into.

section ii.
i tried in section 2 to explain and prove this proposition, expressing my hope that by applying it properly men may make their philosophical reasonings clearer and more precise than ever before. perhaps complex ideas can be well known by definition, for a definition merely enumerates the parts or simple ideas that make up the defined idea. but when we have pushed definitions back to the most simple ideas, and still find some ambiguity and obscurity, where can we turn for help? what technique can we use to throw light on these ideas and give our minds an altogether precise and determinate grasp of them? the answer is that we can produce the impressions or original sentiments, from which the ideas are copied. these impressions are all strong and sensible. there can be no ambiguity in them. they are not only placed in a full light themselves, but may throw light on the corresponding ideas that lie in the dark. perhaps by this means we can come to have a new microscope, so to speak, through which in the human sciences the smallest and simplest ideas can be enlarged enough to be readily grasped and to be as well known as the biggest and most sensible ideas that we can enquire into.

to be fully acquainted, therefore, with the idea of power or necessary connexion, let us examine its impression; and in order to find the impression with greater certainty, let us search for it in all the sources, from which it may possibly be derived.
to be fully acquainted with the idea of power or necessary connection, therefore, let us examine the impression that it copies; and in order to find that impression with greater certainty, let us search for it in all the sources from which it might have been derived.

when we look about us towards external objects, and consider the operation of causes, we are never able, in a single instance, to discover any power or necessary connexion; any quality, which binds the effect to the cause, and renders the one an infallible consequence of the other. we only find, that the one does actually, in fact, follow the other. the impulse of one billiard-ball is attended with motion in the second. this is the whole that appears to the  impression from this succession of objects: consequently, there is not, in any single, particular instance of cause and effect, any thing which can suggest the idea of power or necessary connexion.
when we look around us at external objects, and think about the operation of causes, we are never able to discover any power or necessary connection, any quality that ties the effect to the cause and makes it an infallible consequence of it. all we find is that the one event does in fact follow the other. the impact of one billiard-ball is accompanied by motion in the other. this is all that appears to the outer senses. the mind feels no sentiment or inward impression from this sequence of events: so in no single particular instance of cause and effect is there anything that can suggest the idea of power or necessary connection.

from the first appearance of an object, we never can conjecture what effect will result from it. but were the power or energy of any cause discoverable by the mind, we could foresee the effect, even without experience; and might, at first, pronounce with certainty concerning it, by mere dint of thought and reasoning.
when we experience something for the first time, we never can conjecture what effect will result from it. but if the power or energy of any cause were discoverable by the mind, we would be able to foresee the effect even if we had no previous experience of similar items, and would be able straight off to say with confidence what the effect would be, simply through thought and reasoning.

in reality, there is no part of matter, that does ever, by its sensible qualities, discover any power or energy, or give us ground to imagine, that it could produce any thing, or be followed by any other object, which we could denominate its effect. solidity, extension, motion; these qualities are all complete in themselves, and never point out any other event which may result from them. the scenes of the universe are continually shifting, and one object follows another in an uninterrupted succession; but the power of force, which actuates the whole machine, is entirely concealed from us, and never discovers itself in any of the sensible qualities of body. we know, that, in fact, heat is a constant attendant of flame; but what is the connexion between them, we have no room so much as to conjecture or imagine. it is impossible, therefore, that the idea of power can be derived from the contemplation of bodies, in single instances of their operation; because no bodies ever discover any power, which can be the original of this idea.
in fact no material thing ever reveals through its sensible qualities any power or energy, or gives us a basis for thinking it will produce anything or be followed by any other item that we could call its effect. solidity, extension, motion these qualities are all complete in themselves, and never point to any other item that might result from them. the scenes of the universe are continually shifting, and one object follows another in an uninterrupted sequence; but the power or force that drives the whole machine is entirely concealed from us, and never shows itself in any of the sensible qualities of material things. we know that in fact heat constantly accompanies flame; but we have no basis on which to conjecture or imagine let alone to know what the connection is between flame and heat. so the idea of power can't be derived from our experience of bodies in single instances of their operation; because no bodies ever reveal any power that could be the origin of this idea.

mr. locke, in his chapter of power, says that, finding from experience, that there are several new productions in nature, and concluding that there must somewhere be a power capable of producing them, we arrive at last by this reasoning at the idea of power. but no reasoning can ever give us a new, original, simple idea; as this philosopher himself confesses. this, therefore, can never be the origin of that idea. since, therefore, external objects as they appear to the senses, give us no idea of power or necessary connexion, by their operation in particular instances, let us see, whether this idea be derived from reflection on the operations of our own minds, and be copied from any internal impression. it may be said, that we are every moment conscious of internal power; while we feel, that, by the simple command of our will, we can move the organs of our body, or direct the faculties of our mind. an act of volition produces motion in our limbs, or raises a new idea in our imagination. this influence of the will we know by consciousness. hence we acquire the idea of power or energy; and are certain, that we ourselves and all other intelligent beings are possessed of power. this idea, then, is an idea of reflection, since it arises from reflecting on the operations of our own mind, and on the command which is exercised by will, both over the organs of the body and faculties of the soul.
since external objects as they appear to our senses give us no idea of power or necessary connection by their operation in particular instances, let us see whether this idea is derived from our reflection on the operations of our own minds, and thus copied from some internal impression. here is something that may be said: will by being conscious of it. that is how we acquire the idea of power or energy; and it is what makes us certain that we ourselves and all other intelligent beings are possessed of power. so this idea is an idea of reflection, since it arises from reflecting on the operations of our own mind, and on the command that is exercised by will over the organs of the body and faculties of the soul.

we shall proceed to examine this pretension; and first with regard to the influence of volition over the organs of the body. this influence, we may observe, is a fact, which, like all other natural events, can be known only by experience, and can never be foreseen from any apparent energy or power in the cause, which connects it with the effect, and renders the one an infallible consequence of the other. the motion of our body follows upon the command of our will. of this we are every moment conscious. but the means, by which this is effected; the energy, by which the will performs so extraordinary an operation; of this we are so far from being immediately conscious, that it must for ever escape our most diligent enquiry.
i shall examine this claim, first with regard to the influence of volition over the organs of the body. this influence, like all other natural events, can be known only by experience; it can never be foreseen from any apparent energy or power in the cause which connects it with the effect and makes the effect absolutely certain to follow. the motion of our body follows the command of our will; we are conscious of this at every moment. but how this comes about the energy through which the will performs such an extraordinary operation is something of which we are so far from being immediately conscious that it we can never discover it, however hard we look. i now give three reasons for believing this.

for ; is there any principle in all nature more mysterious than the union of soul with body; by which a supposed spiritual substance acquires such an influence over a material one, that the most refined thought is able to actuate the grossest matter? were we empowered, by a secret wish, to remove mountains, or control the planets in their orbit; this extensive authority would not be more extraordinary, nor more beyond our comprehension. but if by consciousness we perceived any power or energy in the will, we must know this power; we must know its connexion with the effect; we must know the secret union of soul and body, and the nature of both these substances; by which the one is able to operate, in so many instances, upon the other.
first: the most mysterious principle in nature is that of the union of mind and body, in which a supposed spiritual substance gets so much influence over a material substance that the most refined thought can drive large portions of matter such as human limbs. if we had the power to move mountains or control the planets just by secretly wishing these results to occur, this wide-ranging power wouldn't be more extraordinary or further from our understanding than the power our thoughts do have over our bodies. but if we perceived any power or energy in our own will just by being conscious of it, we would know this power, know its connection with the effect, know the secret union of soul and body, and know the nature of both these substances through which one is able to operate so often on the other.

we are not able to move all the organs of the body with a like authority; though we cannot assign any reason besides experience, for so remarkable a difference between one and the other. why has the will an influence over the tongue and fingers, not over the heart or liver? this question would never embarrass us, were we conscious of a power in the former case, not in the latter. we should then perceive, independent of experience, why the authority of will over the organs of the body is circumscribed within such particular limits. being in that case fully acquainted with the power or force, by which it operates, we should also know, why its influence reaches precisely to such boundaries, and no farther.
secondly: we know from experience that we don't have an equal command over all the organs of our body, though we can't explain why there is this remarkable difference between one and the other. why can the will influence the tongue and fingers, not the heart or liver? this question wouldn't perplex us if we were conscious of a power in the former case and not in the latter. we would then perceive, independently of experience, why the authority of will over the organs of the body is kept within certain limits. being fully acquainted with the power or force by which the will operates, we would also know why its influence reaches precisely as far as it does and no further.

a man, suddenly struck with palsy in the leg or arm, or who had newly lost those members, frequently endeavours, at first to move them, and employ them in their usual offices. here he is as much conscious of power to command such limbs, as a man in perfect health is conscious of power to actuate any member which remains in its natural state and condition. but consciousness never deceives. consequently, neither in the one case nor in the other, are we ever conscious of any power. we learn the influence of our will from experience alone. and experience only teaches us, how one event constantly follows another; without instructing us in the secret connexion, which binds them together, and renders them inseparable. if the effect be not known, the power cannot be known nor felt. how indeed can we be conscious of a power to move our limbs, when we have no such power; but only that to move certain animal spirits, which, though they produce at last the motion of our limbs, yet operate in such a manner as is wholly beyond our comprehension?
it often happens that someone who has been suddenly struck with paralysis in a leg or arm, or who has recently lost a limb, tries to move the paralysed or lost limb and to make it perform its usual tasks. in this case he is as much conscious of power to command such limbs as a man in perfect health is conscious of power to move any limb that remains in its natural state and condition. but consciousness never deceives. consequently, we are never conscious of any power in either case i.e. with a limb lost or paralysed, or with all limbs present and correct. we learn the influence of our will from experience alone. and experience teaches us only how one event constantly follows another, without instructing us in the secret connection that binds them together and makes them inseparable.

we may, therefore, conclude from the whole, i hope, without any temerity, though with assurance; that our idea of power is not copied from any sentiment or consciousness of power within ourselves, when we give rise to animal motion, or apply our limbs to their proper use and office. that their motion follows the command of the will is a matter of common experience, like other natural events: but the power or energy by which this is effected, like that in other natural events, is unknown and inconceivable. it may be pretended, that the resistance which we meet with in bodies, obliging us frequently to exert our force, and call up all our power, this gives us the idea of force and power. it is this  which we experience, though it can afford no accurate precise idea of power, enters very much into that vulgar, inaccurate idea, which is formed of it.
it may be claimed that the resistance we meet with in bodies, because it often requires us to exert our own force and call up all our power, gives us the idea of force and power. according to this view, this strong endeavour that we are conscious of in ourselves is the original impression from which this idea is copied. there are two objections to this. (i) we attribute power in a vast number of cases where we never can suppose that this resistance or exertion of force occurs: to god, who never meets with any resistance; to the mind in its command over its ideas and limbs, in common thinking and motion, where the effect follows immediately upon the will without any exertion or summoning up of force; to inanimate matter, which is not capable of conscious effort. (ii) this feeling of an endeavour to overcome resistance has no known connection with any event. we know by experience what follows it; we could not know it a priori. still, it must be admitted that the animal effort which we experience, though it cannot give us an accurate precise idea of power, looms large in the common everyday inaccurate idea which is formed of it.

i need not examine at length the , we only mark these facts, without pretending to have any idea of the inert power; in the same manner as, when we talk of gravity, we mean certain effects, without comprehending that active power. it was never the meaning of sir isaac newton to rob second causes of all force or energy; though some of his followers have endeavoured to establish that theory upon his authority. on the contrary, that great philosopher had recourse to an etherial active fluid to explain his universal attraction; though he was so cautious and modest as to allow, that it was a mere hypothesis, not to be insisted on, without more experiments. i must confess, that there is something in the fate of opinions a little extraordinary. des cartes insinuated that doctrine of the universal and sole efficacy of the deity, without insisting on it. malebranche and other cartesians made it the foundation of all their philosophy. it had, however, no authority in england. locke, clarke, and cudworth, never so much as take notice of it, but suppose all along, that matter has a real, though subordinate and derived power. by what means has it become so prevalent among our modern metaphysicians?
i needn't examine at length the inertia which is so much talked of in the new science, and which is ascribed to matter. we find by experience that a body at rest or in motion continues in that state until some new cause acts upon it; and that when a body is bumped into it takes as much motion from the bumping body as it acquires itself. these are facts. when we call this a power of inertia, we merely record these facts without claiming to have any idea of the inert power; just as in talking of gravity we mean certain effects without having any grasp of that active power. sir isaac newton never meant to deny all force or energy to causes other than god, though some of his followers have tried to establish that theory on his authority. on the contrary, that great scientist invoked an etherial active fluid to explain his universal attraction; though he was cautious and modest enough to allow that this was a mere hypothesis, not to be insisted on without more experiments. i have to say that there's something odd about what happens to opinions. descartes hinted at the doctrine that only god has real power or efficacy, though he didn't insist on this. malebranche and other cartesians made it the foundation of all their philosophy. but the doctrine had no authority in england. locke, clarke, and cudworth never so much as mention it, and assume all along that matter has real power, though of a subordinate and derived kind. by what means has it that is, the doctrine that god is the only being with causal power become so prevalent among our modern metaphysicians?

part ii.
section 8: liberty and necessity

according to these explications and definitions, the idea of
and if the above-mentioned definition is accepted, a definition according to which liberty is contrasted not with constraint (as in my definition) but with necessity, liberty becomes equivalent to chance; and everyone agrees that there is no such thing as chance.

section viii.
part 2

of liberty and necessity.
it is equally easy to prove by the same arguments that liberty understood according to my definition, in which all men agree is also essential to morality, and that no human actions in the absence of such liberty are capable of having any moral qualities, or can be the objects either of approval or disapproval. for actions are objects of our moral sentiment only insofar as they indicate the internal character, passions, and affections; so they can't possibly attract either praise or blame when they come not from those sources but only from external force.

part i.
notes

from motive to voluntary actions, from characters to conduct.
start of a vast footnote

part ii.
end of the vast footnote

section ix.
section 11: a particular providence and a future state

of the reason of animals.
very well. please go ahead.

section i. of the general principles of morals.
section 1: the general sources of morals

disputes with men, pertinaciously obstinate in their principles, are, of all others, the most irksome; except, perhaps, those with persons, entirely disingenuous, who really do not believe the opinions they defend, but engage in the controversy, from affectation, from a spirit of opposition, or from a desire of showing wit and ingenuity, superior to the rest of mankind. the same blind adherence to their own arguments is to be expected in both; the same contempt of their antagonists; and the same passionate vehemence, in inforcing sophistry and falsehood. and as reasoning is not the source, whence either disputant derives his tenets; it is in vain to expect, that any logic, which speaks not to the affections, will ever engage him to embrace sounder principles.
the disputes that one has with men who are stubbornly obstinate in their principles are the most tiresome of all; except perhaps for the disputes with perfectly insincere people who don't really believe the opinions they defend, but engage in the controversy because they enjoy it or because they want to show how much cleverer and more ingenious they are than the rest of mankind. both kinds of disputant show the same blind adherence to their own arguments, the same contempt for their opponents, and the same emotional intensity in pushing their bad arguments and false doctrines. neither kind gets through reasoning the views he is defending, so it's no use expecting to be able to move them from falsehood to truth by reasoning; the only logic they'll be moved by is the logic that speaks to the feelings!

there has been a controversy started of late, much better worth examination, concerning the general foundation of morals; whether they be derived from reason, or from sentiment; whether we attain the knowledge of them by a chain of argument and induction, or by an immediate feeling and finer internal sense; whether, like all sound judgement of truth and falsehood, they should be the same to every rational intelligent being; or whether, like the perception of beauty and deformity, they be founded entirely on the particular fabric and constitution of the human species.
a serious controversy has started up recently one that is worth engaging in about the general foundation of morals: are morals derived from reason or from sentiment (or feeling)? do we get our knowledge of them by a chain of argument and induction, or by an immediate feeling and finer internal sense? should moral opinions (like all sound judgments of truth and falsehood) be the same for every rational intelligent being; or are they (like the perception of beauty and ugliness) based entirely on the particular make-up of the human species?

the ancient philosophers, though they often affirm, that virtue is nothing but conformity to reason, yet, in general, seem to consider morals as deriving their existence from taste and sentiment. on the other hand, our modern enquirers, though they also talk much of the beauty of virtue, and deformity of vice, yet have commonly endeavoured to account for these distinctions by metaphysical reasonings, and by deductions from the most abstract principles of the understanding. such confusion reigned in these subjects, that an opposition of the greatest consequence could prevail between one system and another, and even in the parts of almost each individual system; and yet nobody, till very lately, was ever sensible of it. the elegant lord shaftesbury, who first gave occasion to remark this distinction, and who, in general, adhered to the principles of the ancients, is not, himself, entirely free from the same confusion.
the ancient philosophers often assert that virtue is nothing but conformity to reason; but their writings generally suggest that they think that morals derive their existence from taste and sentiment. and on the other side, our modern enquirers talk a great deal about the beauty of virtue and ugliness of vice, seeming to imply that their basis is sentiment or feeling; but they have commonly tried to account for the virtue/vice distinction by metaphysical reasonings and by deductions from the most abstract principles of the understanding. there has been so much confusion in these subjects that a really important opposition between two systems could pass unnoticed until recently, that is. the elegant lord shaftesbury, who first called this distinction to our attention, and who in general accepted the principles of the ancients, is himself not entirely free from the same confusion.

it must be acknowledged, that both sides of the question are susceptible of specious arguments. moral distinctions, it may be said, are discernible by pure reason: else, whence the many disputes that reign in common life, as well as in philosophy, with regard to this subject: the long chain of proofs often produced on both sides; the examples cited, the authorities appealed to, the analogies employed, the fallacies detected, the inferences drawn, and the several conclusions adjusted to their proper principles. truth is disputable; not taste: what exists in the nature of things is the standard of our judgement; what each man feels within himself is the standard of sentiment. propositions in geometry may be proved, systems in physics may be controverted; but the harmony of verse, the tenderness of passion, the brilliancy of wit, must give immediate pleasure. no man reasons concerning another's beauty; but frequently concerning the justice or injustice of his actions. in every criminal trial the first object of the prisoner is to disprove the facts alleged, and deny the actions imputed to him: the second to prove, that, even if these actions were real, they might be justified, as innocent and lawful. it is confessedly by deductions of the understanding, that the first point is ascertained: how can we suppose that a different faculty of the mind is employed in fixing the other? on the other hand, those who would resolve all moral determinations into sentiment, may endeavour to show, that it is impossible for reason ever to draw conclusions of this nature. to virtue, say they, it belongs to be amiable, and vice odious. this forms their very nature or essence. but can reason or argumentation distribute these different epithets to any subjects, and pronounce beforehand, that this must produce love, and that hatred? or what other reason can we ever assign for these affections, but the original fabric and formation of the human mind, which is naturally adapted to receive them?
admittedly there are plausible arguments on both sides of the question. on the side of the view that moral distinctions are discernible by pure reason there is this line of thought: consider the many disputes in everyday life as well as in philosophy regarding morals; the long chains of proofs that are often produced on both sides; the examples cited, the authorities appealed to, the analogies employed, the fallacies detected, the inferences drawn, and the various conclusions tailored to fit the principles they are supposed to go with. where does all this come from if morals aren't in the domain of reason? truth is disputable; taste isn't. (1) what exists in the nature of things is the standard of ourjudgment. (2) what each man feels within himself is the standard of sentiment or feeling. propositions in geometry can be proved, systems in physics can be controverted; but the harmony of verse, the tenderness of passion, the brilliancy of wit, must give immediate pleasure. no man reasons about someone else's beauty, but we often reason concerning the justice or injustice of someone's actions. in every criminal trial the prisoner aims (1) to disprove the accusations about what he has actually done, and (2) to show that even if these actions were real they could be justified as innocent and lawful. everyone knows that (1) is settled by deductions of the understanding; how can we suppose that in settling (2) a different faculty of the mind is employed? on the other side, those who hold that all moral views are matters of sentiment may say things like this: it is impossible for reason ever to draw moral conclusions. the essence of virtue is that it is amiable, the essence of vice is that it is odious. could reason or argumentation tell us which items are to be labelled amiable and which odious settling in advance that this must produce love, and that must produce hatred? what reason can we ever give for the facts about what we love and what we hate except the basic structure of the human mind?

the end of all moral speculations is to teach us our duty; and, by proper representations of the deformity of vice and beauty of virtue, beget correspondent habits, and engage us to avoid the one, and embrace the other. but is this ever to be expected from inferences and conclusions of the understanding, which of themselves have no hold of the affections or set in motion the active powers of men? they discover truths: but where the truths which they discover are indifferent, and beget no desire or aversion, they can have no influence on conduct and behaviour. what is honourable, what is fair, what is becoming, what is noble, what is generous, takes possession of the heart, and animates us to embrace and maintain it. what is intelligible, what is evident, what is probable, what is true, procures only the cool assent of the understanding; and gratifying a speculative curiosity, puts an end to our researches.
the purpose of all moral theorizing is to teach us our duty, and by presenting the ugliness of vice and the beauty of virtue to get us into the habit of avoiding one and embracing the other. could we ever expect to achieve that through inferences and conclusions of the understanding, which don't in themselves have any hold on our affections and don't set in motion our active powers? inferences etc. reveal truths; but they can't influence our behaviour because the truths they reveal are indifferent, and don't create either desire or aversion. if something is honourable, fair, appropriate, noble or generous, it takes possession of the heart, and stirs us to embrace and maintain it. on the other hand, if something is intelligible, evident, probable or true, that procures only the cool assent of our understanding.

extinguish all the warm feelings and prepossessions in favour of virtue, and all disgust or aversion to vice: render men totally indifferent towards these distinctions; and morality is no longer a practical study, nor has any tendency to regulate our lives and actions.
if you extinguish all the warm feelings and attitudes in favour of virtue, and all disgust or aversion to vice, thus making people totally indifferent towards these distinctions, the result will be that morality is no longer a practical study, having no tendency to regulate our lives and actions.

these arguments on each side (and many more might be produced) are so plausible, that i am apt to suspect, they may, the one as well as the other, be solid and satisfactory, and that reason and sentiment concur in almost all moral determinations and conclusions. the final sentence, it is probable, which pronounces characters and actions amiable or odious, praise-worthy or blameable; that which stamps on them the mark of honour or infamy, approbation or censure; that which renders morality an active principle and constitutes virtue our happiness, and vice our misery; it is probable, i say, that this final sentence depends on some internal sense or feeling, which nature has made universal in the whole species. for what else can have an influence of this nature? but in order to pave the way for such a sentiment, and give a proper discernment of its object, it is often necessary, we find, that much reasoning should precede, that nice distinctions be made, just conclusions drawn, distant comparisons formed, complicated relations examined, and general facts fixed and ascertained. some species of beauty, especially the natural kinds, on their first appearance, command our affection and approbation; and where they fail of this effect, it is impossible for any reasoning to redress their influence, or adapt them better to our taste and sentiment. but in many orders of beauty, particularly those of the finer arts, it is requisite to employ much reasoning, in order to feel the proper sentiment; and a false relish may frequently be corrected by argument and reflection. there are just grounds to conclude, that moral beauty partakes much of this latter species, and demands the assistance of our intellectual faculties, in order to give it a suitable influence on the human mind.
these arguments (and many more that might be produced) are so plausible that i'm inclined to suspect that the arguments on both sides are solid and satisfactory, and that reason and sentiment work together in almost all moral judgments and conclusions. but, if i am right, they enter the picture in different ways. there is the final judgment, which pronounces people and actions amiable or odious, praiseworthy or blameable, stamps on them the mark of honour or infamy, approval or censure, renders morality an active principle, and makes virtue our happiness, and vice our misery. this final moral conclusion depends on some internal sense or feeling that nature has made universal in the whole species; for only a feeling could have an influence such as i have described. but we often find that in order to reach this sentiment or feeling, and to pick out accurately the thing the feeling is about, we have to go through much reasoning, make fine distinctions, draw sound conclusions, compare things that are not greatly alike, examine complicated relations, and settle various factual matters. some sorts of beauty, especially natural beauty, command our affection and approval when we first see them; and if something doesn't have this effect, there's no way for reasoning to remedy the situation and make the item in question more in tune with our taste and sentiment. but there are many kinds of beauty, especially in the finer arts, where one has to use much reasoning if one is to have the right feeling; and a wrong liking for a work of art can often be corrected by argument and reflection. there are good reasons to think that moral beauty is of the latter kind, and can't get a suitable influence on the human mind unless it gets help from our intellectual faculties.

but though this question, concerning the general principles of morals, be curious and important, it is needless for us, at present, to employ farther care in our researches concerning it. for if we can be so happy, in the course of this enquiry, as to discover the true origin of morals, it will then easily appear how far either sentiment or reason enters into all determinations of this nature. in order to attain this purpose, we shall endeavour to follow a very simple method: we shall analyse that complication of mental qualities, which form what, in common life, we call personal merit: we shall consider every attribute of the mind, which renders a man an object either of esteem and affection, or of hatred and contempt; every habit or sentiment or faculty, which, if ascribed to any person, implies either praise or blame, and may enter into any panegyric or satire of his character and manners. the quick sensibility, which, on this head, is so universal among mankind, gives a philosopher sufficient assurance, that he can never be considerably mistaken in framing the catalogue, or incur any danger of misplacing the objects of his contemplation: he needs only enter into his own breast for a moment, and consider whether or not he should desire to have this or that quality ascribed to him, and whether such or such an imputation would proceed from a friend or an enemy. the very nature of language guides us almost infallibly in forming a judgement of this nature; and as every tongue possesses one set of words which are taken in a good sense, and another in the opposite, the least acquaintance with the idiom suffices, without any reasoning, to direct us in collecting and arranging the estimable or blameable qualities of men. the only object of reasoning is to discover the circumstances on both sides, which are common to these qualities; to observe that particular in which the estimable qualities agree on the one hand, and the blameable on the other; and thence to reach the foundation of ethics, and find those universal principles, from which all censure or approbation is ultimately derived. as this is a question of fact, not of abstract science, we can only expect success, by following the experimental method, and deducing general maxims from a comparison of particular instances. the other scientific method, where a general abstract principle is first established, and is afterwards branched out into a variety of inferences and conclusions, may be more perfect in itself, but suits less the imperfection of human nature, and is a common source of illusion and mistake in this as well as in other subjects. men are now cured of their passion for hypotheses and systems in natural philosophy, and will hearken to no arguments but those which are derived from experience. it is full time they should attempt a like reformation in all moral disquisitions; and reject every system of ethics, however subtle or ingenious, which is not founded on fact and observation.
but although this question about which of our faculties is at work in morals is challenging and important, i don't need to go into it any further here. what i do want to do in this enquiry is to discover the true origin of morals. if i have the good fortune to succeed in that, it won't be hard to see how far either sentiment or reason enters into all our moral judgment. (i'll return to that in appendix 1.) to achieve my purpose, i'll try to follow a very simple method: i shall analyse the complex of mental qualities that we commonly call personal merit. i shall consider every attribute of mind that makes a man an object either of respect and affection or of hatred and contempt, every habit or sentiment or ability which, if ascribed to any person, implies either praise or blame. everyone is alert to this difference, so i am pretty sure that i won't ever go seriously wrong in drawing up my lists, putting any item that i am thinking about into the wrong list. all i need do is to look into myself for a moment, and consider whether i would want to have this or that quality ascribed to me, and whether, if it were ascribed to me, that would come from a friend or from an enemy. the very nature of language guides us almost infallibly in forming a judgment of this kind; every language contains one set of words that are understood as approving, and another set that are understood as disapproving, and a quite casual acquaintance with the idiom enables us to collect and arrange the lists of estimable and of blameable qualities of men, without having to reason about what we are doing. the only role of reasoning in this matter is to discover what is in common to the attributes that bring approval, and what is common to all that bring disapproval, and on that basis to reach the foundation of ethics, and find the universal sources from which all blame or approval is ultimately derived. as this is a question of fact, not of abstract theory, the only way we can expect to succeed is by following the experimental method, deriving general maxims from a comparison of particular instances. the other scientific method, in which a general abstract principle is first established and then a variety of inferences and conclusions are drawn from it, may be intrinsically better, but it isn't as well suited to the imperfection of human nature, and is a common source of illusion and error in morals as well as in other subjects. men are now cured of their passion for hypotheses and systems in natural philosophy, and won't listen to any arguments that aren't derived from experience. it's high time they tried a similar reformation in all moral proceedings, and rejected every system of ethics, however subtle or ingenious, that isn't based on fact and observation. i shall begin my enquiry by considering the social virtues, benevolence and justice. getting clear about them will probably give us an opening through which the other virtues can be accounted for.

section ii. of benevolence.
part 1 how benevolence is valued

part i.
how benevolence is valued

it may be esteemed, perhaps, a superfluous task to prove, that the benevolent or softer affections are estimable; and wherever they appear, engage the approbation and good-will of mankind. the epithets sociable, good-natured, humane, merciful, grateful, friendly, generous, beneficent, or their equivalents, are known in all languages, and universally express the highest merit, which human nature is capable of attaining. where these amiable qualities are attended with birth and power and eminent abilities, and display themselves in the good government or useful instruction of mankind, they seem even to raise the possessors of them above the rank of human nature, and make them approach in some measure to the divine. exalted capacity, undaunted courage, prosperous success; these may only expose a hero or politician to the envy and ill-will of the public: but as soon as the praises are added of humane and beneficent; when instances are displayed of lenity, tenderness or friendship; envy itself is silent, or joins the general voice of approbation and applause.
you may well think that there is no need to show that the benevolent or softer affections are estimable, and always attract the approval and good-will of mankind. all languages have equivalents of the words sociable, good-natured, humane, merciful, grateful, friendly, generous and beneficent, and such words always express the highest merit that human nature can attain. when these amiable qualities are accompanied by noble birth and power and distinguished abilities, and display themselves in the good government or useful instruction of mankind, they seem even to raise the possessors of them above the rank of human nature, making them somewhat approach the status of divine. great ability, undaunted courage, tremendous success these may expose a hero or politician to the public's envy and ill-will; but as soon as humane and beneficent are added to the praises when instances are displayed of mercy, gentleness, or friendship envy itself is silent, or joins in with the general voice of approval and applause.

when pericles, the great athenian statesman and general, was on his death-bed, his surrounding friends, deeming him now insensible, began to indulge their sorrow for their expiring patron, by enumerating his great qualities and successes, his conquests and victories, the unusual length of his administration, and his nine trophies erected over the enemies of the republic. you forget, cries the dying hero, who had heard all, you forget the most eminent of my praises, while you dwell so much on those vulgar advantages, in which fortune had a principal share. you have not observed that no citizen has ever yet worne mourning on my account.
when pericles, the great athenian statesman and general, was on his death-bed, his surrounding friends thinking he was unconscious began to express their sorrow by listing their dying patron's great qualities and successes, his conquests and victories, his unusually long time in power, and his nine trophies erected to celebrate victories over the enemies of the republic. in fact the dying hero was conscious, heard all of this, and joined in: you are forgetting the highest of my praises. while dwelling on those common advantages, in which luck had a principal share, you haven't observed that no citizen ever wore mourning because of me.

in men of more ordinary talents and capacity, the social virtues become, if possible, still more essentially requisite; there being nothing eminent, in that case, to compensate for the want of them, or preserve the person from our severest hatred, as well as contempt. a high ambition, an elevated courage, is apt, says cicero, in less perfect characters, to degenerate into a turbulent ferocity. the more social and softer virtues are there chiefly to be regarded. these are always good and amiable.
in men of more ordinary talents and abilities, the social virtues become, if possible, still more essentially needed if a person is to be regarded with approval, because in that case there is no high distinction to compensate for any lack of social virtues, or to preserve the person from our severest hatred as well as contempt. cicero has written that high ambition and great courage are apt in less perfect characters to degenerate into a turbulent ferocity. what such less perfect people mainly need are the softer and more social virtues, which are good and amiable in anyone who has them.

part ii.
part 2

we may observe that, in displaying the praises of any humane, beneficent man, there is one circumstance which never fails to be amply insisted on, namely, the happiness and satisfaction, derived to society from his intercourse and good offices. to his parents, we are apt to say, he endears himself by his pious attachment and duteous care still more than by the connexions of nature. his children never feel his authority, but when employed for their advantage. with him, the ties of love are consolidated by beneficence and friendship. the ties of friendship approach, in a fond observance of each obliging office, to those of love and inclination. his domestics and dependants have in him a sure resource; and no longer dread the power of fortune, but so far as she exercises it over him. from him the hungry receive food, the naked clothing, the ignorant and slothful skill and industry. like the sun, an inferior minister of providence he cheers, invigorates, and sustains the surrounding world.
benevolence and utility when we are praising a humane and beneficent man, we always emphasize the happiness and satisfaction that society gets from his good works. we are apt to say that he is dear to his parents not only because of the tie of blood but also, and more, because of his pious attachment to them and his dutiful care for them. his children never feel his authority except when it is exerted for their benefit. with him, the ties of love are consolidated by beneficence and friendship. the ties of friendship approach those of love and inclination, because of the spirit in which he does good things for his friends. for his servants and dependents he is a sure resource; and they no longer dread the power of fortune except insofar as it concerns his welfare. from him the hungry receive food, the naked receive clothing, the ignorant or lazy receive skill and work. he is like the sun in being an inferior minister of providence; he cheers, invigorates and sustains the world around him.

if confined to private life, the sphere of his activity is narrower; but his influence is all benign and gentle. if exalted into a higher station, mankind and posterity reap the fruit of his labours. as these topics of praise never fail to be employed, and with success, where we would inspire esteem for any one; may it not thence be concluded, that the utility, resulting from the social virtues, forms, at least, a part of their merit, and is one source of that approbation and regard so universally paid to them? when we recommend even an animal or a plant as useful and beneficial, we give it an applause and recommendation suited to its nature. as, on the other hand, reflection on the baneful influence of any of these inferior beings always inspires us with the sentiment of aversion. the eye is pleased with the prospect of corn-fields and loaded vine-yards; horses grazing, and flocks pasturing: but flies the view of briars and brambles, affording shelter to wolves and serpents.
if he is confined to private life, his sphere of activity is smaller but his influence is all benign and gentle. if he is exalted into a higher position, mankind and posterity reap the fruit of his labours. these modes of praise are always employed, and with success, when we want to inspire esteem for someone. can't we infer from this that the utility resulting from the social virtues the good that is done under their influence is at least a part of their merit, and is one source of the approval and respect that everyone gives to them? when we recommend even an animal or a plant as useful and beneficial, we applaud and praise it in a manner suited to its nature. just as, on the other hand, when we think about the harmful influence of any kind of plant or animal, this always creates in us a sentiment or feeling of aversion. the eye is pleased with the view of corn-fields and loaded vine-yards, horses grazing and flocks pasturing; but it avoids the view of briars and brambles that provide shelter for wolves and snakes.

a machine, a piece of furniture, a vestment, a house well contrived for use and conveniency, is so far beautiful, and is contemplated with pleasure and approbation. an experienced eye is here sensible to many excellencies, which escape persons ignorant and uninstructed. can anything stronger be said in praise of a profession, such as merchandize or manufacture, than to observe the advantages which it procures to society; and is not a monk and inquisitor enraged when we treat his order as useless or pernicious to mankind?
if a machine or piece of furniture or article of clothing or house is well designed for use and convenience, to that extent it is beautiful, and is contemplated with pleasure and approval. with this kind of thing, an experienced eye will detect many excellences that ignorant and uninstructed people would miss. can anything stronger be said in praise of an occupation such as merchandising or manufacturing than to point out the good it does for society? and won't a monk or an inquisitor be enraged if we treat his religious organisation as useless or harmful to mankind?

the historian exults in displaying the benefit arising from his labours. the writer of romance alleviates or denies the bad consequences ascribed to his manner of composition.
the historian rejoices in displaying the benefits arising from his labours. the writer of romances does what he can to lessen or deny the bad consequences that are ascribed to the kind of thing he writes.

in general, what praise is implied in the simple epithet useful! what reproach in the contrary!
in general, what praise is implied in the simple epithet useful! what reproach in the contrary!

your gods, says cicero, in opposition to the epicureans, cannot justly claim any worship or adoration, with whatever imaginary perfections you may suppose them endowed. they are totally useless and inactive. even the egyptians, whom you so much ridicule, never consecrated any animal but on account of its utility.
cicero in opposition to the epicureans said: your gods are not entitled to any worship or adoration, whatever imaginary perfections you endow them with. they are totally useless and inactive. even the egyptians, whom you so much ridicule, never treated any animal as sacred except on account of its utility.

the sceptics assert, though absurdly, that the origin of all religious worship was derived from the utility of inanimate objects, as the sun and moon, to the support and well-being of mankind. this is also the common reason assigned by historians, for the deification of eminent heroes and legislators.
the sceptics assert that the all religious worship originated from the utility of inanimate objects, such as the sun and moon, to the support and well-being of mankind. (this is an absurd theory of the origin of religion, but its sheer existence supports my thesis about the central place of utility, doing-good, bringing-benefit, to our approval and admiration.) this is also the reason that historians commonly give for the deification of eminent heroes and legislators.

to plant a tree, to cultivate a field, to beget children; meritorious acts, according to the religion of zoroaster.
to plant a tree, to cultivate a field, to beget children these are all meritorious acts, according to the religion of zoroaster.

in all determinations of morality, this circumstance of public utility is ever principally in view; and wherever disputes arise, either in philosophy or common life, concerning the bounds of duty, the question cannot, by any means, be decided with greater certainty, than by ascertaining, on any side, the true interests of mankind. if any false opinion, embraced from appearances, has been found to prevail; as soon as farther experience and sounder reasoning have given us juster notions of human affairs, we retract our first sentiment, and adjust anew the boundaries of moral good and evil.
empirical evidence of failures of benevolence in moral judgments, this matter of public utility is always centrally in view; and whenever every-day or philosophical disputes arise concerning the limits of duty, by far the most certain way of settling the disputed question is to ascertain how each side of it relates to the true interests of mankind. if we find that a misreading of the evidence has led us to accept a false opinion about human interests, as soon as further experience and sounder reasoning have given us a more correct view of the facts, we retract our first sentiment and re-adjust the line between moral good and evil. here are four examples of this kind of shift in moral opinion. (1) giving alms to common beggars is naturally praised, because it seems to bring relief to those who are poor and distressed; but when we see that alms-giving encourages idleness and debauchery, we regard that kind of charity as a weakness rather than a virtue. (2) tyrannicide, i.e. the assassination of usurpers and oppressive rulers, was highly praised in ancient times, because it freed mankind from many of these monsters, and seemed to keep in awe other rulers who couldn't be reached by the sword or the dagger. but history and experience have since convinced us that this practice makes rulers more suspicious and cruel; so that a tiberius and a brutes

giving alms to common beggars is naturally praised; because it seems to carry relief to the distressed and indigent: but when we observe the encouragement thence arising to idleness and debauchery, we regard that species of charity rather as a weakness than a virtue. tyrannicide, or the assassination of usurpers and oppressive princes, was highly extolled in ancient times; because it both freed mankind from many of these monsters, and seemed to keep the others in awe, whom the sword or poniard could not reach. but history and experience having since convinced us, that this practice increases the jealousy and cruelty of princes, a timoleon and a brutus, though treated with indulgence on account of the prejudices of their times, are now considered as very improper models for imitation.
in moral judgments, this matter of public utility is always centrally in view; and whenever every-day or philosophical disputes arise concerning the limits of duty, by far the most certain way of settling the disputed question is to ascertain how each side of it relates to the true interests of mankind. if we find that a misreading of the evidence has led us to accept a false opinion about human interests, as soon as further experience and sounder reasoning have given us a more correct view of the facts, we retract our first sentiment and re-adjust the line between moral good and evil. here are four examples of this kind of shift in moral opinion. (1) giving alms to common beggars is naturally praised, because it seems to bring relief to those who are poor and distressed; but when we see that alms-giving encourages idleness and debauchery, we regard that kind of charity as a weakness rather than a virtue. (2) tyrannicide, i.e. the assassination of usurpers and oppressive rulers, was highly praised in ancient times, because it freed mankind from many of these monsters, and seemed to keep in awe other rulers who couldn't be reached by the sword or the dagger. but history and experience have since convinced us that this practice makes rulers more suspicious and cruel; so that a tiberius and a brutes

upon the whole, then, it seems undeniable, that nothing can bestow more merit on any human creature than the sentiment of benevolence in an eminent degree; and that a part, at least, of its merit arises from its tendency to promote the interests of our species, and bestow happiness on human society. we carry our view into the salutary consequences of such a character and disposition; and whatever has so benign an influence, and forwards so desirable an end, is beheld with complacency and pleasure. the social virtues are never regarded without their beneficial tendencies, nor viewed as barren and unfruitful. the happiness of mankind, the order of society, the harmony of families, the mutual support of friends, are always considered as the result of their gentle dominion over the breasts of men.
taking all of this together, it seems undeniable that nothing can bestow more merit on any person that his having a very high degree of the sentiment of benevolence; and that at least a part of the merit of this sentiment comes from its probable consequences for the interests of our species and the happiness of human society. when we think about a benevolent person, we carry our view of his character and disposition forward to their good consequences; and we look with satisfaction and pleasure at anything that has such a benign influence and contributes to such a desirable end. the social virtues are never viewed as barren and unfruitful; we always think of them along with their beneficial tendencies, seeing their gentle reign over the hearts of men as a cause of the happiness of mankind, the order of society, the harmony of families, the mutual support of friends.

section iii. of justice.
section 3: justice

part i.
part 1

that justice is useful to society, and consequently that part of its merit, at least, must arise from that consideration, it would be a superfluous undertaking to prove. that public utility is the sole origin of justice, and that reflections on the beneficial consequences of this virtue are the sole foundation of its merit; this proposition, being more curious and important, will better deserve our examination and enquiry.
the proposition that justice is useful to society, and thus at least part of its merit must come from that fact doesn't need to be argued for because it is so obviously true. not so the proposition that public utility is the sole origin of justice, and thoughts about its beneficial consequences are the sole basis for its merit. this proposition is more challenging and important, so it better deserves to be looked into with care.

let us suppose that nature has bestowed on the human race such profuse abundance of all external conveniencies, that, without any uncertainty in the event, without any care or industry on our part, every individual finds himself fully provided with whatever his most voracious appetites can want, or luxurious imagination wish or desire. his natural beauty, we shall suppose, surpasses all acquired ornaments: the perpetual clemency of the seasons renders useless all clothes or covering: the raw herbage affords him the most delicious fare; the clear fountain, the richest beverage. no laborious occupation required: no tillage: no navigation. music, poetry, and contemplation form his sole business: conversation, mirth, and friendship his sole amusement. it seems evident that, in such a happy state, every other social virtue would flourish, and receive tenfold increase; but the cautious, jealous virtue of justice would never once have been dreamed of. for what purpose make a partition of goods, where every one has already more than enough? why give rise to property, where there cannot possibly be any injury? why call this object mine, when upon the seizing of it by another, i need but stretch out my hand to possess myself to what is equally valuable? justice, in that case, being totally useless, would be an idle ceremonial, and could never possibly have place in the catalogue of virtues.
justice and abundance let's suppose that nature has given the human race such a profuse abundance of all external conveniences that all of us, without any care or industry on our part, can be confident that we are fully supplied with whatever our hungriest appetites can want or our most luxurious imagination can wish or desire. let us suppose that man is so situated that: his natural beauty surpasses all acquired ornaments. the perpetual mildness of the seasons makes clothes unnecessary. raw fruit and vegetables provide delicious food. the clear fountain provides the richest beverage. no hard work is needed no ploughing, no navigation. music, poetry and meditating are his only business. conversation, fun and friendship are his sole amusement. it seems clear that in such a happy state every other social virtue would flourish and be increased tenfold; but the cautious, jealous virtue of justice would never once have been dreamed of. what point would there be in dividing up goods, when everyone already has more than enough? why institute property when there can't possibly be any harm in not doing so? why call this object mine when just by stretching out my hand i could get another one that is like it and equally valuable? in this state of affairs, justice would be totally useless; it would be an idle ceremonial, having no place in the list of virtues.

we see, even in the present necessitous condition of mankind, that, wherever any benefit is bestowed by nature in an unlimited abundance, we leave it always in common among the whole human race, and make no subdivisions of right and property. water and air, though the most necessary of all objects, are not challenged as the property of individuals; nor can any man commit injustice by the most lavish use and enjoyment of these blessings. in fertile extensive countries, with few inhabitants, land is regarded on the same footing. and no topic is so much insisted on by those, who defend the liberty of the seas, as the unexhausted use of them in navigation. were the advantages, procured by navigation, as inexhaustible, these reasoners had never had any adversaries to refute; nor had any claims ever been advanced of a separate, exclusive dominion over the ocean.
even in the present needy condition of mankind, we see that wherever any benefit is bestowed by nature in an unlimited abundance, we leave it in common among the whole human race, not dividing it up in terms of right and property. water and air, though more needed than anything else, are not claimed as the property of individuals; and no-one can commit an injustice by the most lavish use and enjoyment of these blessings. in large fertile countries with few inhabitants, land is seen in the same way. and those who defend the liberty of the seas have as their principal theme the unexhausted use of them in navigation i.e. the fact that however many ships there are, the world's oceans don't get used up. if the benefits of navigation (such as trade and treasure-finding) were equally inexhaustible, those defenders of the liberty of the seas would never had any opponents, and no nation would ever have claimed a separate, exclusive dominion over some part of the ocean.

it may happen, in some countries, at some periods, that there be established a property in water, none in land; if the latter be in greater abundance than can be used by the inhabitants, and the former be found, with difficulty, and in very small quantities. again; suppose, that, though the necessities of human race continue the same as at present, yet the mind is so enlarged, and so replete with friendship and generosity, that every man has the utmost tenderness for every man, and feels no more concern for his own interest than for that of his fellows; it seems evident, that the use of justice would, in this case, be suspended by such an extensive benevolence, nor would the divisions and barriers of property and obligation have ever been thought of. why should i bind another, by a deed or promise, to do me any good office, when i know that he is already prompted, by the strongest inclination, to seek my happiness, and would, of himself, perform the desired service; except the hurt, he thereby receives, be greater than the benefit accruing to me? in which case, he knows, that, from my innate humanity and friendship, i should be the first to oppose myself to his imprudent generosity. why raise landmarks between my neighbour's field and mine, when my heart has made no division between our interests; but shares all his joys and sorrows with the same force and vivacity as if originally my own? every man, upon this supposition, being a second self to another, would trust all his interests to the discretion of every man; without jealousy, without partition, without distinction. and the whole human race would form only one family; where all would lie in common, and be used freely, without regard to property; but cautiously too, with as entire regard to the necessities of each individual, as if our own interests were most intimately concerned.
here is a second supposition. let us suppose that the human race, while having the same needs and shortages that it actually has, had a mind that was so enlarged, so full of friendship and generosity, that each man had the utmost concern for every man, feeling no more concern for his own interest than for the interests of his fellows. it seems obvious that this extensive benevolence would cancel the use of justice, and the divisions and barriers of property and obligation would never been thought of. why should i want a contract or a promise to bind someone else to do me some good, when i know that he already has the strongest inclination to seek my happiness, and would unprompted perform the desired service. (what if his performing it would cause a greater loss to him than the benefit he would be bringing to you? in that case he knows that my innate humanity and friendship will cause me to be the first to oppose this imprudent generosity.) why place boundary-markers between my neighbour's field and mine, when my heart has made no division between my interests and his, and shares all his joys and sorrows with the same force and vivacity as if they were originally my own?, and would trust all his interests to the discretion of every man without jealousy, without partition, and without distinguishing one person from another. the whole human race would constitute a single family in which everything would be held in common, and be used freely, without regard to property; but cautiously too, with as much concern for the needs of each individual as if our own interests were intimately concerned.

in the present disposition of the human heart, it would, perhaps, be difficult to find complete instances of such enlarged affections; but still we may observe, that the case of families approaches towards it; and the stronger the mutual benevolence is among the individuals, the nearer it approaches; till all distinction of property be, in a great measure, lost and confounded among them. between married persons, the cement of friendship is by the laws supposed so strong as to abolish all division of possessions; and has often, in reality, the force ascribed to it. and it is observable, that, during the ardour of new enthusiasms, when every principle is inflamed into extravagance, the community of goods has frequently been attempted; and nothing but experience of its inconveniencies, from the returning or disguised selfishness of men, could make the imprudent fanatics adopt anew the ideas of justice and of separate property. so true is it, that this virtue derives its existence entirely from its necessary use to the intercourse and social state of mankind.
given what the human heart is actually like, it might be hard to find complete examples of such enlarged affections; but we may see approximations to it in families; and in any group the stronger the mutual benevolence is among the individuals, the nearer the group comes to the no-need-for-justice condition, until all distinctions of property are in a great measure lost and mixed up among them. the laws presume that the cement of friendship between a married couple is so strong as to abolish all division of possessions; and in many cases it actually is as strong as that. and it's a matter of empirical fact that during the ardour of new enthusiasms when every principle is heated up into its most extreme form, reformers have frequently tried to abolish property, i.e. have community of goods; and what has led the imprudent fanatics to change course and restore the ideas of justice and of separate property the only thing that could get them to do this is their experience of the drawbacks that the no-property system has, because of the selfishness of men (who hid their selfishness during the revolution, or returned to being selfish after the revolutionary fuss had died down). that's a measure of how true it is that the virtue of justice derives its existence entirely from the needed things that it does for human interactions and the social state of mankind. justice and scarcity

to make this truth more evident, let us reverse the foregoing suppositions; and carrying everything to the opposite extreme, consider what would be the effect of these new situations. suppose a society to fall into such want of all common necessaries, that the utmost frugality and industry cannot preserve the greater number from perishing, and the whole from extreme misery; it will readily, i believe, be admitted, that the strict laws of justice are suspended, in such a pressing emergence, and give place to the stronger motives of necessity and self-preservation. is it any crime, after a shipwreck, to seize whatever means or instrument of safety one can lay hold of, without regard to former limitations of property? or if a city besieged were perishing with hunger; can we imagine, that men will see any means of preservation before them, and lose their lives, from a scrupulous regard to what, in other situations, would be the rules of equity and justice? the use and tendency of that virtue is to procure happiness and security, by preserving order in society: but where the society is ready to perish from extreme necessity, no greater evil can be dreaded from violence and injustice; and every man may now provide for himself by all the means, which prudence can dictate, or humanity permit. the public, even in less urgent necessities, opens granaries, without the consent of proprietors; as justly supposing, that the authority of magistracy may, consistent with equity, extend so far: but were any number of men to assemble, without the tie of laws or civil jurisdiction; would an equal partition of bread in a famine, though effected by power and even violence, be regarded as criminal or injurious?
to make this truth more obvious, let us reverse the suppositions we have been making, taking everything to the opposite extreme, and seeing what effect that would have in each case. suppose a society suffers such a lack of all common necessities that even with the utmost frugality and industry most of them will die prematurely, and everyone lives in extreme misery. i think you will readily agree that in such a pressing emergency the strict laws of justice will be suspended, being dislodged by the stronger motives of necessity and self-preservation. when a sailor whose ship is going down is in the water, is it a crime for him to seize whatever he can to keep him afloat, without regard to whose property it is or was? if a besieged city is starving to death, can we imagine that any citizen will see a means of preservation within his reach and not take it, losing his life because of his scrupulous regard for what in other situations would be the rules of property and justice? what that virtue is for, and what it tends to produce, is happiness and security through the preservation of order in society; but when a society is on the brink of perishing from extreme necessity, there is no greater evil to be feared from violence and injustice; and every man may now provide for himself by any means that prudence dictates and humanity permits. even in cases of need that are less drastic than the one we have been supposing, the government opens granaries without the consent of their owners, on the correct assumption that the authority of the law can stretch that far as long as it does so in a fair way. well, if any number of men came together without the tie of laws or civil jurisdiction, and suffered a famine, would it be regarded as criminal or injurious to divide up the available food equally, if this were done through power and even violence?

suppose likewise, that it should be a virtuous man's fate to fall into the society of ruffians, remote from the protection of laws and government; what conduct must he embrace in that melancholy situation? he sees such a desperate rapaciousness prevail; such a disregard to equity, such contempt of order, such stupid blindness to future consequences, as must immediately have the most tragical conclusion, and must terminate in destruction to the greater number, and in a total dissolution of society to the rest. he, meanwhile, can have no other expedient than to arm himself, to whomever the sword he seizes, or the buckler, may belong: to make provision of all means of defence and security: and his particular regard to justice being no longer of use to his own safety or that of others, he must consult the dictates of self-preservation alone, without concern for those who no longer merit his care and attention.
justice and malevolence now suppose that a virtuous man has the bad luck to fall into the society of ruffians, far removed from the protection of laws and government; how is he to behave in that miserable situation? he sees such ruthless and violent greed prevailing, such a disregard for fairness, such contempt for social order, such stupid blindness to future consequences, that it is bound to have the most tragic conclusion death for the majority and total dissolution of this society for the rest. the question was: what should he do? all he can do is to arm himself, no matter whose sword or shield it is that he snatches up, so as to provide himself with all possible means of self-defence and security. his personal concern for justice is no longer any use for his own safety or anyone else's, so he must consult the dictates of self-preservation alone, without concern for those who no longer deserve his care and attention.

when any man, even in political society, renders himself by his crimes, obnoxious to the public, he is punished by the laws in his goods and person; that is, the ordinary rules of justice are, with regard to him, suspended for a moment, and it becomes equitable to inflict on him, for the benefit of society, what otherwise he could not suffer without wrong or injury.
the rules of justice can also be rightly suspended in a politically organized society. when any man commits crimes that make him obnoxious to the public, he is punished by the laws in his goods (fines) and in his person (imprisonment or physical punishment). this means that the ordinary rules of justice are briefly suspended with regard to him, and it becomes fair to inflict on him, for the benefit of society, things it would be wrong or injurious to inflict on him otherwise. if it weren't for this suspension, punishment would always be wrong.

the rage and violence of public war; what is it but a suspension of justice among the warring parties, who perceive, that this virtue is now no longer of any use or advantage to them? the laws of war, which then succeed to those of equity and justice, are rules calculated for the advantage and utility of that particular state, in which men are now placed. and were a civilized nation engaged with barbarians, who observed no rules even of war, the former must also suspend their observance of them, where they no longer serve to any purpose; and must render every action or recounter as bloody and pernicious as possible to the first aggressors.
think about the rage and violence of a public war e.g. a war between two countries. what is it but a suspension of justice among the warring parties, who see that this virtue is now no longer of any use or advantage to them? the laws of war, which then take over from the laws of equity and justice, are rules calculated to do good and be useful for men who are in that particular state they are now placed in, namely the state of war. if a civilized nation is at war with barbarians who don't even respect any rules of war, the former must also suspend their observance of any such rules, because they no longer serve any purpose; and they must make every battle or skirmish as bloody and destructive as possible to the barbarians, whom we may suppose to have been the first aggressors.

thus, the rules of equity or justice depend entirely on the particular state and condition in which men are placed, and owe their origin and existence to that utility, which results to the public from their strict and regular observance. reverse, in any considerable circumstance, the condition of men: produce extreme abundance or extreme necessity: implant in the human breast perfect moderation and humanity, or perfect rapaciousness and malice: by rendering justice totally useless, you thereby totally destroy its essence, and suspend its obligation upon mankind. the common situation of society is a medium amidst all these extremes. we are naturally partial to ourselves, and to our friends; but are capable of learning the advantage resulting from a more equitable conduct. few enjoyments are given us from the open and liberal hand of nature; but by art, labour, and industry, we can extract them in great abundance. hence the ideas of property become necessary in all civil society: hence justice derives its usefulness to the public: and hence alone arises its merit and moral obligation.
thus, the rules of equity or justice depend entirely on the particular state and condition in which men are placed; what starts them and keeps them in existence is their usefulness, the utility that comes to the public from their strict and regular observance. if you reverse in any significant way the condition of men produce extreme abundance or extreme need, endow humans with perfect moderation and humanity or perfect rapacity and malice you make justice entirely useless, totally destroying its essence and suspending its obligation on mankind. the usual state of human affairs is a medium amidst all these extremes. we are naturally partial to ourselves and our friends, but are capable of learning the advantage resulting from a more equitable conduct. few enjoyments are given us directly from the open and liberal hand of nature; but by skill and hard work we can extract them in great abundance. that is why the ideas of property become necessary in all civil society; it is why justice is useful to the public; and that is the sole source of its merit and moral obligation.

these conclusions are so natural and obvious, that they have not escaped even the poets, in their descriptions of the felicity attending the golden age or the reign of saturn. the seasons, in that first period of nature, were so temperate, if we credit these agreeable fictions, that there was no necessity for men to provide themselves with clothes and houses, as a security against the violence of heat and cold: the rivers flowed with wine and milk: the oaks yielded honey; and nature spontaneously produced her greatest delicacies. nor were these the chief advantages of that happy age. tempests were not alone removed from nature; but those more furious tempests were unknown to human breasts, which now cause such uproar, and engender such confusion. avarice, ambition, cruelty, selfishness, were never heard of: cordial affection, compassion, sympathy, were the only movements with which the mind was yet acquainted. even the punctilious distinction of mine and thine was banished from among the happy race of mortals, and carried with it the very notion of property and obligation, justice and injustice.
the golden age these conclusions are so natural and obvious that even the poets have noticed them, in their descriptions of the happiness of the golden age celebrated by ancient greek poets. according to those pleasant fictions, the seasons in that first period of nature were so temperate that men didn't need clothes or houses to guard against the violence of heat and cold. the rivers flowed with wine and milk. the oaks yielded honey. nature spontaneously produced her greatest delicacies. and that wasn't the best of it. in that happy age, not only were tempests removed from nature, but the more violent inner tempests that now cause such uproar and create such confusion were unknown to human breasts. avarice, ambition, cruelty, selfishness, were never heard of. the only states of mind that anyone had were cordial affection, compassion and sympathy. even the carefully correct distinction of mine and thine was banished from the human scene, and took with it the very notions of property and obligation, justice and injustice.

this poetical fiction of the golden age, is in some respects, of a piece with the philosophical fiction of the state of nature; only that the former is represented as the most charming and most peaceable condition, which can possibly be imagined; whereas the latter is painted out as a state of mutual war and violence, attended with the most extreme necessity. on the first origin of mankind, we are told, their ignorance and savage nature were so prevalent, that they could give no mutual trust, but must each depend upon himself and his own force or cunning for protection and security. no law was heard of: no rule of justice known: no distinction of property regarded: power was the only measure of right; and a perpetual war of all against all was the result of men's untamed selfishness and barbarity.
the state of nature this poetic fiction of the golden age is in some ways comparable with the philosophical fiction of the state of nature; except that the former is represented as the most charming and peaceable condition that can possibly be imagined, whereas the latter is depicted as a state of mutual war and violence accompanied by extreme need. at the outset, we are told, mankind's ignorance and savage nature were so prevalent that they couldn't trust one another; each had to depend on himself, and his own force or cunning, for protection and security. no law was heard of; no rule of justice known; no rights of ownership respected; the only measure of right was power, and a perpetual war of all against all was the result of men's untamed selfishness and barbarity.

whether such a condition of human nature could ever exist, or if it did, could continue so long as to merit the appellation of a state, may justly be doubted. men are necessarily born in a family-society, at least; and are trained up by their parents to some rule of conduct and behaviour. but this must be admitted, that, if such a state of mutual war and violence was ever real, the suspension of all laws of justice, from their absolute inutility, is a necessary and infallible consequence.
whether such a condition of human nature could exist, and whether if it did it could for long deserve to be called a state, is doubtful. men are necessarily born into a familysociety, at least, and are brought up by their parents to observe some rules of conduct and behaviour. but it can't be denied that if such a state of mutual war and violence were ever real, it would inevitably involve the suspension of all laws of justice because they couldn't do any possible good.

the more we vary our views of human life, and the newer and more unusual the lights are in which we survey it, the more shall we be convinced, that the origin here assigned for the virtue of justice is real and satisfactory.
the more we look into human life from different angles, and the newer and more unusual the lights are in which we survey it, the more we'll be convinced that this account of the virtue of justice is realistic and satisfactory. justice and the lesser breeds

were there a species of creatures intermingled with men, which, though rational, were possessed of such inferior strength, both of body and mind, that they were incapable of all resistance, and could never, upon the highest provocation, make us feel the effects of their resentment; the necessary consequence, i think, is that we should be bound by the laws of humanity to give gentle usage to these creatures, but should not, properly speaking, lie under any restraint of justice with regard to them, nor could they possess any right or property, exclusive of such arbitrary lords. our intercourse with them could not be called society, which supposes a degree of equality; but absolute command on the one side, and servile obedience on the other. whatever we covet, they must instantly resign: our permission is the only tenure, by which they hold their possessions: our compassion and kindness the only check, by which they curb our lawless will: and as no inconvenience ever results from the exercise of a power, so firmly established in nature, the restraints of justice and property, being totally useless, would never have place in so unequal a confederacy.
here is a supposition of a quite different kind from the earlier ones. suppose this to be the case: mixed in among mankind are creatures of a different species, which, though rational, are so much weaker in body and mind than human beings are that they can't stand up to us and can never, however greatly provoked, make us feel the effects of their resentment. if this came true, i think that we would be bound by the laws of humanity to treat these creatures gently, but we wouldn't strictly speaking lie under any restraint of justice with regard to them, and they couldn't have any property or other rights in relation to us though they might have them in relation to one another. our relationships with them couldn't be called society, a label that implies some degree of equality; what there would be instead is absolute command on one side and servile obedience on the other. if we want something, they must immediately hand it over. the only basis there is for them to own anything is our permitting them to. the only barrier they have to our lawless will lawless, that is, in relation to them is our compassion and kindness. we'll never suffer any inconvenience from the exercise of our power over them, a power that is so firmly established in nature; so the restraints of justice and property would be totally useless for us and would therefore never have a place in this unequal relationship.

this is plainly the situation of men, with regard to animals; and how far these may be said to possess reason, i leave it to others to determine. the great superiority of civilized europeans above barbarous indians, tempted us to imagine ourselves on the same footing with regard to them, and made us throw off all restraints of justice, and even of humanity, in our treatment of them. in many nations, the female sex are reduced to like slavery, and are rendered incapable of all property, in opposition to their lordly masters. but though the males, when united, have in all countries bodily force sufficient to maintain this severe tyranny, yet such are the insinuation, address, and charms of their fair companions, that women are commonly able to break the confederacy, and share with the other sex in all the rights and privileges of society.
this is clearly how men are situated in relation to animals. (are they rational? i'll leave that for others to determine!) the great superiority of civilized europeans over barbarous indians tempted us to think we related to them as we do to the animals, and led us to throw off all restraints of justice, and even of humanity, in our treatment of them. in many nations, females are reduced to a similar slavery, and are denied any rights of property in relation to their lordly masters. but although the males when they combine forces have, in all countries, enough bodily force to maintain this severe tyranny, their fair companions have so much subtlety, skill and charm that they are commonly able to break up the confederacy among the males and then share with them all the rights and privileges of society.

were the human species so framed by nature as that each individual possessed within himself every faculty, requisite both for his own preservation and for the propagation of his kind: were all society and intercourse cut off between man and man, by the primary intention of the supreme creator: it seems evident, that so solitary a being would be as much incapable of justice, as of social discourse and conversation. where mutual regards and forbearance serve to no manner of purpose, they would never direct the conduct of any reasonable man. the headlong course of the passions would be checked by no reflection on future consequences. and as each man is here supposed to love himself alone, and to depend only on himself and his own activity for safety and happiness, he would, on every occasion, to the utmost of his power, challenge the preference above every other being, to none of which he is bound by any ties, either of nature or of interest. but suppose the conjunction of the sexes to be established in nature, a family immediately arises; and particular rules being found requisite for its subsistence, these are immediately embraced; though without comprehending the rest of mankind within their prescriptions. suppose that several families unite together into one society, which is totally disjoined from all others, the rules, which preserve peace and order, enlarge themselves to the utmost extent of that society; but becoming then entirely useless, lose their force when carried one step farther. but again suppose, that several distinct societies maintain a kind of intercourse for mutual convenience and advantage, the boundaries of justice still grow larger, in proportion to the largeness of men's views, and the force of their mutual connexions. history, experience, reason sufficiently instruct us in this natural progress of human sentiments, and in the gradual enlargement of our regards to justice, in proportion as we become acquainted with the extensive utility of that virtue.
now look at another sequence of suppositions. (1) suppose the human species were so built by nature that each individual had within himself everything needed for his own preservation and for the propagation of his kind, and that all society and all interactions between man and man were cut off by the primary intention of the supreme creator. it seems obvious that such a solitary being would be no more capable of justice or injustice than he would be of social discourse and conversation. if mutual respect and forbearance didn't achieve anything, they would never guide the behaviour of any reasonable man. the headlong rush of the emotions wouldn't be checked by any reflection on future consequences. and, as each man would love himself alone and depend only on himself and his own activity for safety and happiness, he would always do his very best to claim preference over every other being, because he wouldn't be linked to any of them by any ties of nature or of self-interest. (2) now vary this last supposition of the solitariness of every human being by supposing that the conjunction of the sexes is established in nature. that immediately gives rise to families; particular rules will be found to be necessary if it is to survive, so these will be immediately accepted as applying within each family though not as between any family and people outside it. (3) now suppose that a number of families unite to form a single society that has no links with any others: in that case, the rules preserving peace and order will extend themselves right out to the boundaries of society; at any distance beyond those boundaries they will have no force because they won't do any good. (4) but then (finally) suppose that many distinct societies interact with one another for mutual convenience and advantage; then the boundaries of justice still extend still wider, in proportion to the breadth of men's views and the strength of their inter-connections. history, experience and reason sufficiently instruct us in this natural development of human sentiments, and in the gradual broadening of our views about the scope of justice, in proportion as we come to know more about the utility of that virtue.

part ii.
part 2

if we examine the particular laws, by which justice is directed, and property determined; we shall still be presented with the same conclusion. the good of mankind is the only object of all these laws and regulations. not only is it requisite, for the peace and interest of society, that men's possessions should be separated; but the rules, which we follow, in making the separation, are such as can best be contrived to serve farther the interests of society.
if we examine the particular laws by which justice is directed and property determined, we'll still reach the same conclusion. the only object of all these laws and regulations is the good of mankind. it's not just that the peace and interest of society requires that there be an institution of individual ownership; the actual rules by which we sort out the details of what is mine and what is yours are themselves devised to serve, as well as possible, the further interests of society.

we shall suppose that a creature, possessed of reason, but unacquainted with human nature, deliberates with himself what rules of justice or property would best promote public interest, and establish peace and security among mankind: his most obvious thought would be, to assign the largest possessions to the most extensive virtue, and give every one the power of doing good, proportioned to his inclination. in a perfect theocracy, where a being, infinitely intelligent, governs by particular volitions, this rule would certainly have place, and might serve to the wisest purposes: but were mankind to execute such a law; so great is the uncertainty of merit, both from its natural obscurity, and from the self-conceit of each individual, that no determinate rule of conduct would ever result from it; and the total dissolution of society must be the immediate consequence. fanatics may suppose, that dominion is founded on grace, and that saints alone inherit the earth; but the civil magistrate very justly puts these sublime theorists on the same footing with common robbers, and teaches them by the severest discipline, that a rule, which, in speculation, may seem the most advantageous to society, may yet be found, in practice, totally pernicious and destructive.
let us suppose that a creature who has reason but no experience of human nature is mulling over the question of what rules of justice or property would best promote public interest, and establish peace and security among mankind. his most obvious thought would be this: give the largest possessions to those with the most virtue; and give everyone a power of doing good that is proportional to his wanting to do good. this rule might be appropriate might lead to the best results in a perfect theocracy in which everything happens through the particular volitions of an infinitely intelligent being. but if mere mankind adopted such a law, it couldn't be cleanly applied because merit is so uncertain; the immediate result would be the total dissolution of society. (why is merit uncertain? because it is naturally obscure, and also because each individual over-rates his own merit.) fanatics may think they are entitled to help themselves to others property because dominion is based on grace and saints alone inherit the earth; but the law of the land rightly treats these high-flying theorists as being on a par with common robbers, and teaches them by the severest discipline that a rule that seems in theory to be advantageous to society may be found in practice to be totally harmful and destructive.

that there were religious fanatics of this kind in england, during the civil wars, we learn from history; though it is probable, that the obvious tendency of these principles excited such horror in mankind, as soon obliged the dangerous enthusiasts to renounce, or at least conceal their tenets. perhaps the levellers, who claimed an equal distribution of property, were a kind of political fanatics, which arose from the religious species, and more openly avowed their pretensions; as carrying a more plausible appearance, of being practicable in themselves, as well as useful to human society. it must, indeed, be confessed, that nature is so liberal to mankind, that, were all her presents equally divided among the species, and improved by art and industry, every individual would enjoy all the necessaries, and even most of the comforts of life; nor would ever be liable to any ills but such as might accidentally arise from the sickly frame and constitution of his body. it must also be confessed, that, wherever we depart from this equality, we rob the poor of more satisfaction than we add to the rich, and that the slight gratification of a frivolous vanity, in one individual, frequently costs more than bread to many families, and even provinces. it may appear withal, that the rule of equality, as it would be highly useful, is not altogether impracticable; but has taken place, at least in an imperfect degree, in some republics; particularly that of sparta; where it was attended, it is said, with the most beneficial consequences. not to mention that the agrarian laws, so frequently claimed in rome, and carried into execution in many greek cities, proceeded, all of them, from a general idea of the utility of this principle.
history tells us that there were religious fanatics of this kind in england during the civil wars, though the obvious tendency towards chaos of these principles probably created so much horror in people that these dangerous would-be reformers felt compelled to renounce or at least conceal their views. perhaps the levellers, who wanted all property to be distributed equally, were a kind of political fanatics, an off-shoot of the religious ones. they were more open about their views than the saints-alone-inherit-the-earth people, because their views seemed more capable of being put into practice, as well as being more useful to human society. there are indeed several sound things to be said in defence of the levellers. (1) nature is so generous towards mankind that if all her gifts were evenly divided among our species, and improved by skill and work, every individual would enjoy all the necessities and most of the comforts of life, and wouldn't be liable to any misfortunes except ones deriving from physical illness. (2) whenever we depart from this equality, we rob the poor of more satisfaction than we add to the rich; the slight gratification of a frivolous vanity in one individual often costs more than bread to many families and even provinces. (3) the rule of equality, as well as being potentially very useful, isn't altogether impracticable. it has actually been followed, at least partially, in some republics; especially that of sparta, where it is said to have been accompanied by the most beneficial consequences. and then there were the agrarian laws, so often pushed for in rome and actually carried out in many greek cities; those laws all came from a general idea of the good consequences of the levelling principle.

but historians, and even common sense, may inform us, that, however specious these ideas of perfect equality may seem, they are really, at bottom, impracticable; and were they not so, would be extremely pernicious to human society. render possessions ever so equal, men's different degrees of art, care, and industry will immediately break that equality. or if you check these virtues, you reduce society to the most extreme indigence; and instead of preventing want and beggary in a few, render it unavoidable to the whole community. the most rigorous inquisition too is requisite to watch every inequality on its first appearance; and the most severe jurisdiction, to punish and redress it. but besides, that so much authority must soon degenerate into tyranny, and be exerted with great partialities; who can possibly be possessed of it, in such a situation as is here supposed? perfect equality of possessions, destroying all subordination, weakens extremely the authority of magistracy, and must reduce all power nearly to a level, as well as property.
but historians tell us and common sense agrees that however attractive these ideas of perfect equality may be, they are basically not practicable; and if they could be and were put into practice, their consequences would be extremely harmful to human society. however equally possessions are divided up, men's different degrees of skill, care and industry will immediately break the equality. and if you try to avoid this by putting constraints on skill, care and industry, you'll reduce society to extreme poverty; instead of preventing want and beggary in a few people, you'll be making it unavoidable for the whole community! also, to spot any inequality the moment it shows up there would have to be a rigorous monitoring system, and to punish and correct it there would have to be a very severe penal system. that much authority would be sure to degenerate into tyranny, and to be exercised in unfair ways. but more to the point nobody could possibly have such authority in a society such as the levellers want. perfect equality of possessions would destroy all subordination, thereby greatly weakening the authority of officers of the law; as well as levelling out property, it would pretty well level out power.

we may conclude, therefore, that, in order to establish laws for the regulation of property, we must be acquainted with the nature and situation of man; must reject appearances, which may be false, though specious; and must search for those rules, which are, on the whole, most useful and beneficial. vulgar sense and slight experience are sufficient for this purpose; where men give not way to too selfish avidity, or too extensive enthusiasm.
what we can conclude from all this is that in order to establish laws for the regulation of property we must be acquainted with the nature and situation of man; not be taken in by misleading facts about what seems to be the case; and search for the rules that are over-all the most useful and beneficial.

who sees not, for instance, that whatever is produced or improved by a man's art or industry ought, for ever, to be secured to him, in order to give encouragement to such useful habits and accomplishments? that the property ought also to descend to children and relations, for the same useful purpose? that it may be alienated by consent, in order to beget that commerce and intercourse, which is so beneficial to human society? and that all contracts and promises ought carefully to be fulfilled, in order to secure mutual trust and confidence, by which the general interest of mankind is so much promoted?
as an example of how basically easy it is to get the right answers: anyone can see that something produced or improved by a man's skill or labour ought to be permanently his (social benefit: encouraging such useful habits and accomplishments). that his property ought to be inherited by his children and relations (social purpose: the same). that he can consent to make it the property of someone else (social purpose: creating the commerce and other interactions that are so beneficial to human society). and that all contracts and promises ought to be carefully fulfilled (social purpose: to secure the mutual trust and confidence that does so much to promote the general interest of mankind). in each case, i am talking about the social purpose of having that rule about property, not of acting in that way in an individual case.

examine the writers on the laws of nature; and you will always find, that, whatever principles they set out with, they are sure to terminate here at last, and to assign, as the ultimate reason for every rule which they establish, the convenience and necessities of mankind. a concession thus extorted, in opposition to systems, has more authority than if it had been made in prosecution of them.
study the writers on the laws of nature and you'll find that, whatever principles they set out with, they are sure to end up with the one i have been defending. they all give as the ultimate reason for every rule that they lay down the convenience and necessities of mankind. that is the most convincing kind of support to have the support of someone who is trying to oppose one's views.

what other reason, indeed, could writers ever give, why this must be mine and that yours; since uninstructed nature surely never made any such distinction? the objects which receive those appellations are, of themselves, foreign to us; they are totally disjoined and separated from us; and nothing but the general interests of society can form the connexion.
indeed, what other reason could writers ever give for holding that this is mine and that is yours; since nature, left to itself, surely never made any such distinction? the things labelled mine and yours are in themselves quite other than us; they are totally separated from us; and nothing but the general interests of society can form the connection.

sometimes the interests of society may require a rule of justice in a particular case; but may not determine any particular rule, among several, which are all equally beneficial. in that case, the slightest analogies are laid hold of, in order to prevent that indifference and ambiguity, which would be the source of perpetual dissension. thus possession alone, and first possession, is supposed to convey property, where no body else has any preceding claim and pretension. many of the reasonings of lawyers are of this analogical nature, and depend on very slight connexions of the imagination.
it can happen that the interests of society require that there be some rule of justice in a particular kind of case, but don't pick any particular rule out of several that are all equally beneficial. when that happens, the slightest analogies are laid hold of as a basis for selecting one rule over the others, because there would be perpetual conflicts if no selection were made and several rules were regarded as being in force. that's why your sheerly possessing being the first to possess something is supposed to make it yours, if no-one else has any prior claim to it. many of the reasonings of lawyers are of this analogical nature, and depend on very slight connections of the imagination.

does any one scruple, in extraordinary cases, to violate all regard to the private property of individuals, and sacrifice to public interest a distinction which had been established for the sake of that interest? the safety of the people is the supreme law: all other particular laws are subordinate to it, and dependent on it: and if, in the common course of things, they be followed and regarded; it is only because the public safety and interest commonly demand so equal and impartial an administration.
does anyone hesitate, in extraordinary cases, to violate all respect for the private property of individuals and sacrifice to public interest a distinction that was established in the first place for the sake of that interest? the safety of the people is the supreme law: all other more special laws are subordinate to it, and dependent on it. and if in the common course of things those laws are followed and respected, that is only because the public safety and interest commonly demand that society be governed in a way that is even-handed and fair.

sometimes both utility and analogy fail, and leave the laws of justice in total uncertainty. thus, it is highly requisite, that prescription or long possession should convey property; but what number of days or months or years should be sufficient for that purpose, it is impossible for reason alone to determine. civil laws here supply the place of the natural code, and assign different terms for prescription, according to the different utilities, proposed by the legislator. bills of exchange and promissory notes, by the laws of most countries, prescribe sooner than bonds, and mortgages, and contracts of a more formal nature.
sometimes both utility and analogy fail, and leave the laws of justice in total uncertainty. we need to have a rule according to which your having been in possession of something for a long time makes you the rightful owner of it, and we get that far through reasoning about utility and analogy; but sheer reasoning won't take us any further, i.e. it won't determine how many days, months or years constitute a long time is for purposes of this rule. in this case, civil laws have to do what is not done by the natural code; they assign different values of long time for different kinds of things that can be owned, depending on the different utilities that the legislator is concerned about..

in general we may observe that all questions of property are subordinate to the authority of civil laws, which extend, restrain, modify, and alter the rules of natural justice, according to the particular convenience of each community. the laws have, or ought to have, a constant reference to the constitution of government, the manners, the climate, the religion, the commerce, the situation of each society. a late author of genius, as well as learning, has prosecuted this subject at large, and has established, from these principles, a system of political knowledge, which abounds in ingenious and brilliant thoughts, and is not wanting in solidity.
all questions of property fall under the authority of civil laws, which extend, restrain, modify and alter the rules of natural justice, according to the convenience of each community in particular. the laws do or should constantly reflect the constitution of government, the manners, the climate, the religion, the commerce and the situation of each society. a recent learned and able author has pursued this subject at great length, and has grown from these seeds a complete philosophy of politics, with many ingenious and brilliant thoughts and some substance.

what is a mans property? anything which it is lawful for him, and for him alone, to use. but what rule have we, by which we can distinguish these objects? here we must have recourse to statutes, customs, precedents, analogies, and a hundred other circumstances; some of which are constant and inflexible, some variable and arbitrary. but the ultimate point, in which they all professedly terminate, is the interest and happiness of human society. where this enters not into consideration, nothing can appear more whimsical, unnatural, and even superstitious, than all or most of the laws of justice and of property.
what is a man's property? anything that it is lawful for him and only him to use. what rule do we have for picking out these objects? here we must have resort to statutes, customs, precedents, analogies, and a hundred other things some of them constant and inflexible, others variable and arbitrary. but what they are all rooted in is the interests and happiness of human society. if we leave that out of account, nothing could appear more whimsical, unnatural and even superstitious than most of the laws of justice and of property. justice and superstition

those who ridicule vulgar superstitions, and expose the folly of particular regards to meats, days, places, postures, apparel, have an easy task; while they consider all the qualities and relations of the objects, and discover no adequate cause for that affection or antipathy, veneration or horror, which have so mighty an influence over a considerable part of mankind. a syrian would have starved rather than taste pigeon; an egyptian would not have approached bacon: but if these species of food be examined by the senses of sight, smell, or taste, or scrutinized by the sciences of chemistry, medicine, or physics, no difference is ever found between them and any other species, nor can that precise circumstance be pitched on, which may afford a just foundation for the religious passion. a fowl on thursday is lawful food; on friday abominable: eggs in this house and in this diocese, are permitted during lent; a hundred paces farther, to eat them is a damnable sin. this earth or building, yesterday was profane; to-day, by the muttering of certain words, it has become holy and sacred. such reflections as these, in the mouth of a philosopher, one may safely say, are too obvious to have any influence; because they must always, to every man, occur at first sight; and where they prevail not, of themselves, they are surely obstructed by education, prejudice, and passion, not by ignorance or mistake.
it is a very easy task to ridicule simple-minded superstitions, and expose the folly of special attitudes to foods, days, places, postures, clothing. all you need do is to consider all the qualities and relations of the objects in question, and discover no adequate cause for the affection or antipathy, veneration or horror, that have such a great influence over a large part of mankind. a syrian would starve rather than taste pigeon; an egyptian won't come near bacon; but when these foods are examined by the senses of sight, smell or taste, or studied through the sciences of chemistry, medicine or physics, no difference is ever found between them and any other kind of meat; no factual basis is ever found for the religious passion. a fowl on thursday is lawful food; on friday it's abominable. eggs in this house and in this diocese are permitted during lent; just down the road eating them is a damnable sin. yesterday there was nothing religious about this plot of land or this building; today the mumbling of certain words has made it holy and sacred. when a philosopher points these things out, it's safe to say that he won't make any difference to anyone. the facts are so obvious that everyone must have noticed them at first sight. when they don't prevail, that isn't because people don't know the facts or have misunderstood them somehow; it's because of people's upbringing, prejudice and passion.

it may appear to a careless view, or rather a too abstracted reflection, that there enters a like superstition into all the sentiments of justice; and that, if a man expose its object, or what we call property, to the same scrutiny of sense and science, he will not, by the most accurate enquiry, find any foundation for the difference made by moral sentiment. i may lawfully nourish myself from this tree; but the fruit of another of the same species, ten paces off, it is criminal for me to touch. had i worn this apparel an hour ago, i had merited the severest punishment; but a man, by pronouncing a few magical syllables, has now rendered it fit for my use and service. were this house placed in the neighbouring territory, it had been immoral for me to dwell in it; but being built on this side the river, it is subject to a different municipal law, and by its becoming mine i incur no blame or censure. the same species of reasoning it may be thought, which so successfully exposes superstition, is also applicable to justice; nor is it possible, in the one case more than in the other, to point out, in the object, that precise quality or circumstance, which is the foundation of the sentiment.
someone who doesn't look carefully enough, or who is thinking at too a high a level of generality, might come to think that a similar superstition is involved in all the sentiments of justice; and that if we take the focus of justice namely, what we call property and subject it to the same scrutiny of sense and science, we won't find, however hard we look, any foundation for the distinctions drawn by moral sentiment. it is lawful for me to eat fruit from this tree, but it would be a crime for me to take fruit of the same kind from a tree a few yards away. if i had been dressed like this an hour ago, i would have deserved the severest punishment; but a man has pronounced a few magical syllables and thereby made it proper for me to be clothed in this way. if this house were in the neighbouring territory, it would have been immoral for me to live in it; but because it is built on this side of the river it is subject to a different municipal law, and i incur no blame or censure by coming to own it. it may be thought, then, that the kind of reasoning that so successfully exposes superstition can also be applied to justice, and that it's no more possible with justice than with superstition to pick out the precise features of the object that are the basis for the sentiment.

but there is this material difference between superstition and justice, that the former is frivolous, useless, and burdensome; the latter is absolutely requisite to the well-being of mankind and existence of society. when we abstract from this circumstance (for it is too apparent ever to be overlooked) it must be confessed, that all regards to right and property, seem entirely without foundation, as much as the grossest and most vulgar superstition. were the interests of society nowise concerned, it is as unintelligible why another's articulating certain sounds implying consent, should change the nature of my actions with regard to a particular object, as why the reciting of a liturgy by a priest, in a certain habit and posture, should dedicate a heap of brick and timber, and render it, thenceforth and for ever, sacred.
but there's this solid difference: superstition is frivolous, useless and burdensome, whereas justice is absolutely necessary for the well-being of mankind and the existence of society. when we set this fact aside (we couldn't overlook it it's too obvious for that), it has to be agreed that all respects for right and property seem to be entirely without foundation, as much so as the grossest and most vulgar superstition. why does that man's making certain sounds implying consent change the nature of my actions with regard to this object? why does the reciting of a liturgy by a priest, dressed in a certain way and holding his body in a certain way, make a heap of brick and timber forever sacred? if the interests of society weren't involved in any way, the former question would be an unanswerable as the latter.

footnote: it is evident, that the will or consent alone never transfers property, nor causes the obligation of a promise (for the same reasoning extends to both), but the will must be expressed by words or signs, in order to impose a tie upon any man. the expression being once brought in as subservient to the will, soon becomes the principal part of the promise; nor will a man be less bound by his word, though he secretly give a different direction to his intention, and withhold the assent of his mind. but though the expression makes, on most occasions, the whole of the promise, yet it does not always so; and one who should make use of any expression, of which he knows not the meaning, and which he uses without any sense of the consequences, would not certainly be bound by it. nay, though he know its meaning, yet if he use it in jest only, and with such signs as evidently show, that he has no serious intention of binding himself, he would not lie under any obligation of performance; but it is necessary, that the words be a perfect expression of the will, without any contrary signs. nay, even this we must not carry so far as to imagine, that one, whom, by our quickness of understanding, we conjecture, from certain signs, to have an intention of deceiving us, is not bound by his expression or verbal promise, if we accept of it; but must limit this conclusion to those cases where the signs are of a different nature from those of deceit. all these contradictions are easily accounted for, if justice arise entirely from its usefulness to society; but will never be explained on any other hypothesis.
obviously, the will or consent alone never transfers property or creates the obligation of a promise. for the will to impose an obligation on any man, it must be expressed by words or signs. the words initially come in as subservient to the will, but before long they become the principal part of the promise; and a man who secretly intends not to keep his promise and withholds the assent of his mind, isn't any less bound by the promise. but though in most cases the expression is the whole promise, it isn't always so. (1) someone who uttered the words without knowing their meaning wouldn't have made a binding promise. (2) someone who knows what the words mean and utters them only as a joke, giving clear signs that he has no serious intention of binding himself, wouldn't be obliged to keep the promise. (3) but for this to hold good, the clear signs mustn't be ones that we cleverly detect while the man is trying to deceive us. for him not to be bound by a verbal promise he must give signs different from signs of deceit that he doesn't intend to keep the promise. all these contradictions are easily accounted for if justice arises entirely from its public utility; they'll never be explained on any other basis.

it is remarkable that the moral decisions of the jesuits and other relaxed casuists, were commonly formed in prosecution of some such subtilties of reasoning as are here pointed out, and proceed as much from the habit of scholastic refinement as from any corruption of the heart, if we may follow the authority of mons. bayle. see his dictionary, article loyola. and why has the indignation of mankind risen so high against these casuists; but because every one perceived, that human society could not subsist were such practices authorized, and that morals must always be handled with a view to public interest, more than philosophical regularity? if the secret direction of the intention, said every man of sense, could invalidate a contract; where is our security? and yet a metaphysical schoolman might think, that, where an intention was supposed to be requisite, if that intention really had not place, no consequence ought to follow, and no obligation be imposed. the casuistical subtilties may not be greater than the snbtilties of lawyers, hinted at above; but as the former are pernicious, and the latter innocent and even necessary, this is the reason of the very different reception they meet with from the world.
it is remarkable that the moral decisions of the jesuits and other relaxed casuists were usually made in the course of dealing with subtleties of reasoning such as i have been pointing out. why has the indignation of mankind risen so high against these casuists? it can only be because everyone sees that if the practices the casuists were trying to rule out were authorized, human society couldn't survive; and that morals should always be handled with a view to public interest rather than to the demands of high-level fine-grained philosophical theories of morals. any sensible person can have the thought: if the secret direction of the intention can invalidate a contract, where is our security? but someone coming at this from an abstract metaphysical point of view might think that where an intention was supposed to be requisite, if it really wasn't there then no consequence ought to follow no obligation would be imposed. the casuistical subtleties may not be greater than the subtleties of lawyers that i have hinted at above; but they meet with very different receptions from the world because the former are pernicious while the latter are innocent and even necessary. the roman catholic church teaches that (1) any sacrament can be invalidated by the frame of mind of the officiating priest.

it is a doctrine of the church of rome, that the priest, by a secret direction of his intention, can invalidate any sacrament. this position is derived from a strict and regular prosecution of the obvious truth, that empty words alone, without any meaning or intention in the speaker, can never be attended with any effect. if the same conclusion be not admitted in reasonings concerning civil contracts, where the affair is allowed to be of so much less consequence than the eternal salvation of thousands, it proceeds entirely from men's sense of the danger and inconvenience of the doctrine in the former case: and we may thence observe, that however positive, arrogant, and dogmatical any superstition may appear, it never can convey any thorough persuasion of the reality of its objects, or put them, in any degree, on a balance with the common incidents of life, which we learn from daily observation and experimental reasoning.
this position comes from rigorously following through the seeming consequences of the obvious truth that empty words alone, without any meaning or intention in the speaker, can never have any effect. the analogous position in civil laws would be that (2) any civil contract can be nullified by the frame of mind of one of the parties to it. what is at stake in (1) is the eternal salvation of thousands of people, whereas what's at stake in (2) is merely the upsetting of civil society. so why do we not follow the church's lead in (1) by accepting (2) regarding civil contracts? our rejection of (2) comes entirely from our sense of the danger and inconvenience that would ensue from accepting it! this gives us a clear example of the fact that however positive, arrogant and dogmatic any superstition may appear to be, it can never thoroughly convince anyone that its threats are real, or get anyone to give them any weight at all when balanced against the common incidents of life that we learn from daily observation and empirical thinking.

section iv. of political society.
section 4. political society

when a number of political societies are erected, and maintain a great intercourse together, a new set of rules are immediately discovered to be useful in that particular situation; and accordingly take place under the title of laws of nations. of this kind are, the sacredness of the person of ambassadors, abstaining from poisoned arms, quarter in war, with others of that kind, which are plainly calculated for the advantage of states and kingdoms in their intercourse with each other.
laws of nations when a number of political societies are formed, and they maintain a thick web of interactions amongst themselves, it is immediately found that a new set of rules would be useful in that situation; so such rules come into existence, under the title laws of nations. examples include ambassadors are not to be harmed in any way. poisoned weapons are not to be used. a soldier in battle is not to be immediately killed if he surrenders. these rules and others of that kind are plainly calculated for the advantage of states and kingdoms in their inter-relations.

the rules of justice, such as prevail among individuals, are not entirely suspended among political societies. all princes pretend a regard to the rights of other princes; and some, no doubt, without hypocrisy. alliances and treaties are every day made between independent states, which would only be so much waste of parchment, if they were not found by experience to have some influence and authority. but here is the difference between kingdoms and individuals. human nature cannot by any means subsist, without the association of individuals; and that association never could have place, were no regard paid to the laws of equity and justice. disorder, confusion, the war of all against all, are the necessary consequences of such a licentious conduct. but nations can subsist without intercourse. they may even subsist, in some degree, under a general war. the observance of justice, though useful among them, is not guarded by so strong a necessity as among individuals; and the moral obligation holds proportion with the usefulness. all politicians will allow, and most philosophers, that reasons of state may, in particular emergencies, dispense with the rules of justice, and invalidate any treaty or alliance, where the strict observance of it would be prejudicial, in a considerable degree, to either of the contracting parties. but nothing less than the most extreme necessity, it is confessed, can justify individuals in a breach of promise, or an invasion of the properties of others.
the rules of justice that apply among individuals are not entirely suspended among political societies. all rulers claim to respect the rights of other rulers, and no doubt some of them can say this without hypocrisy. alliances and treaties are constantly being made between independent states, and this would be a mere waste of parchment if it hadn't been found that treaties etc. have some influence and authority. but here is the difference between kingdoms and individuals. human nature can't possibly survive without the association of individuals; and that association can exist only if some respect is paid to the laws of equity and justice. disorder, confusion, the war of all against all, are the inevitable upshot of such licentious conduct as would occur if equity and justice had no place. nations, on the other hand, can survive without having relations with one another. they can even survive, to some extent, under a general war. though respect for justice is useful among states, it isn't as necessary or useful there as it is among individuals; and corresponding to that lessened usefulness is a lessened degree of moral obligation. all politicians and most philosophers will allow that in particular emergencies reasons of state may justify dispensing with the rules of justice, unilaterally invalidating some treaty or alliance the strict observance of which would be very harmful to either of the contracting parties. but it is generally agreed that nothing less than the most extreme necessity can justify individuals in a breach of promise or an invasion of the properties of others.

in a confederated commonwealth, such as the achaean republic of old, or the swiss cantons and united provinces in modern times; as the league has here a peculiar utility, the conditions of union have a peculiar sacredness and authority, and a violation of them would be regarded as no less, or even as more criminal, than any private injury or injustice.
in a confederated commonwealth, such as the ancient achaean republic in greece, or today's swiss cantons and united provinces, the league has a special utility, and so the conditions of union have a special sacredness and authority, and a violation of them would be regarded as being at least as criminal as any private injury or injustice.

the long and helpless infancy of man requires the combination of parents for the subsistence of their young; and that combination requires the virtue of chastity or fidelity to the marriage bed. without such a utility, it will readily be owned, that such a virtue would never have been thought of.
chastity the long and helpless infancy of a human being requires that the parents work together for the care of their young, and this collaboration requires the virtue of chastity, i.e. fidelity to the marriage bed. you'll agree that if chastity weren't useful in that way it would never have been thought of as a virtue.

an infidelity of this nature is much more pernicious in women than in men. hence the laws of chastity are much stricter over the one sex than over the other.
sexual infidelity in marriage is much more harmful in women than in men. that's why the laws of chastity are much stricter over the female sex than over the male.

these rules have all a reference to generation; and yet women past child-bearing are no more supposed to be exempted from them than those in the flower of their youth and beauty. general rules are often extended beyond the principle whence they first arise; and this in all matters of taste and sentiment. it is a vulgar story at paris, that, during the rage of the mississippi, a hump-backed fellow went every day into the rue de quincempoix, where the stock-jobbers met in great crowds, and was well paid for allowing them to make use of his hump as a desk, in order to sign their contracts upon it. would the fortune, which he raised by this expedient, make him a handsome fellow; though it be confessed, that personal beauty arises very much from ideas of utility? the imagination is influenced by associations of ideas; which, though they arise at first from the judgement, are not easily altered by every particular exception that occurs to us. to which we may add, in the present case of chastity, that the example of the old would be pernicious to the young; and that women, continually foreseeing that a certain time would bring them the liberty of indulgence, would naturally advance that period, and think more lightly of this whole duty, so requisite to society.
these rules are all connected with procreation; yet they are supposed to apply to women who are past child-bearing as much as to those in the flower of their youth and beauty. general rules are often extended beyond their original source, and this is true in all matters of taste and sentiment. it is agreed that our ideas about personal beauty arise very much from ideas of utility. an example might be this: we see a hump-back as ugly, basically because we think of such a hump as an obstacle to activity, to doing well in life the opposite of useful. now consider this story that has come out of france: during a stock-market surge in paris, a hump-backed fellow went every day to the street where the stock-brokers gather, and was well paid for letting them use his hump as a desk on which to sign their contracts. so his hump was thoroughly useful. but would the money that he made in this way turn him into a handsome fellow? no. the imagination is influenced by associations of ideas; and even if a given association initially arose from the judgment such as the association of hump-backed with ugly, mediated by the judgment that humped backs are not useful it isn't easily altered by particular exceptions that we come across. that could explain our hostility to sexual infidelity in women who are past child-bearing age. there is also something else we can add: if older women were free to be unchaste, their example would be harmful to the younger ones; if women could always look forward to a time when they would be at liberty to indulge themselves in this way, it would be natural for them to bring that time closer, i.e. not to wait, and to think more lightly of this whole duty that is in fact so much needed by society.

what is the reason, why, by the athenian laws, one might marry a half-sister by the father, but not by the mother? plainly this: the manners of the athenians were so reserved, that a man was never permitted to approach the women's apartment, even in the same family, unless where he visited his own mother. his step-mother and her children were as much shut up from him as the woman of any other family, and there was as little danger of any criminal correspondence between them. uncles and nieces, for a like reason, might marry at athens; but neither these, nor half-brothers and sisters, could contract that alliance at rome, where the intercourse was more open between the sexes. public utility is the cause of all these variations.
members of a single family living together have such frequent opportunities for licence of this kind that nothing could preserve purity of manners if marriage or any sexual relationship were allowed between people who are closely related to one another. incest, therefore, being especially harmful in its effects, is regarded as especially wicked and morally ugly. and some of the details of the anti-incest morality can also be explained in terms of consequences, as i shall now show. why did the laws of athens allow a man to marry a half-sister (1) who had the same father as he did, but not a half-sister (2) who had the same mother? plainly for this reason: the manners of the athenians were so reserved that a man was never allowed to approach the women's part of any house, even the house of a close relative, except when he was paying a visit to his own mother. his step-mother and her children including the half-sister (1) were as much shut up from him as the women of any other family, so that there was as little danger of any unlawful sexual relations between him and them as between him and any other women; whereas a half-sister (2) with whom he shared a mother would be someone he had grown up with and seen countless times. for a similar reason, uncles and nieces were allowed to marry at athens. but the permitted-in-athens marriages that i have mentioned were not permitted in rome, where relations between the sexes were more open. public utility is the cause of all these variations. other kinds of immoral conduct

to repeat, to a man's prejudice, anything that escaped him in private conversation, or to make any such use of his private letters, is highly blamed. the free and social intercourse of minds must be extremely checked, where no such rules of fidelity are established.
if something that doesn't do a man credit escapes his lips in private conversation, or if he says it in a private letter, it is highly blameworthy to repeat it to anyone else. the free and social interactions of minds would be seriously inhibited if such rules of trustworthiness were not established.

even in repeating stories, whence we can foresee no ill consequences to result, the giving of one's author is regarded as a piece of indiscretion, if not of immorality. these stories, in passing from hand to hand, and receiving all the usual variations, frequently come about to the persons concerned, and produce animosities and quarrels among people, whose intentions are the most innocent and inoffensive.
even in passing on gossip from which we can't foresee any harm resulting, it is regarded as a piece of indiscretion, if not of immorality, to tell whom we got the story from. as these stories are passed from hand to hand they are altered in various ways; and they often reach the persons concerned the persons they are about and produce animosities and quarrels among people whose intentions were entirely innocent and inoffensive.

to pry into secrets, to open or even read the letters of others, to play the spy upon their words and looks and actions; what habits more inconvenient in society? what habits, of consequence, more blameable?
to pry into secrets, to open or even read the letters of others, to spy on their words and looks and actions what practices are more trouble-making in society? what habits, therefore, are more blameable?

this principle is also the foundation of most of the laws of good manners; a kind of lesser morality, calculated for the ease of company and conversation. too much or too little ceremony are both blamed, and everything, which promotes ease, without an indecent familiarity, is useful and laudable.
this principle of the well-being of society is also the basis for most of the laws of good manners a kind of lesser morality that aims at the ease of company and conversation. too much ceremony is blamed; so is too little; and anything that promotes ease, without an indecent familiarity, is useful and praiseworthy.

constancy in friendships, attachments, and familiarities, is commendable, and is requisite to support trust and good correspondence in society. but in places of general, though casual concourse, where the pursuit of health and pleasure brings people promiscuously together, public conveniency has dispensed with this maxim; and custom there promotes an unreserved conversation for the time, by indulging the privilege of dropping afterwards every indifferent acquaintance, without breach of civility or good manners.
it is commendable to be constant in one's friendships, attachments and familiarities, and this is needed to support trust and good relations in society. but in places where people come together casually in some pursuit of health and pleasure, public convenience doesn't require such constancy; it is customary to encourage unreserved conversation in such contexts by granting the privilege of then dropping one's casual acquaintance, without this being a breach of civility or good manners.

even in societies, which are established on principles the most immoral, and the most destructive to the interests of the general society, there are required certain rules, which a species of false honour, as well as private interest, engages the members to observe. robbers and pirates, it has often been remarked, could not maintain their pernicious confederacy, did they not establish a pew distributive justice among themselves, and recall those laws of equity, which they have violated with the rest of mankind.
the morality of lesser societies even in societies with utterly immoral foundations, ones that are the most destructive to the interests of the general society, there have to be certain rules that the members are constrained to observe by a sort of false honour as well as by private self-interest. robbers and pirates, it has often been remarked, couldn't maintain their harmful confederacy if they didn't establish a new distributive justice among themselves, calling into force among themselves the laws of equity they have violated with the rest of mankind.

i hate a drinking companion, says the greek proverb, who never forgets. the follies of the last debauch should be buried in eternal oblivion, in order to give full scope to the follies of the next.
i hate a drinking companion, says the greek proverb, who never forgets. the follies of the last drinking spree should be buried in eternal oblivion, so as to give full scope to the follies of the next one!.

to carry the matter farther, we may observe, that it is impossible for men so much as to murder each other without statutes, and maxims, and an idea of justice and honour. war has its laws as well as peace; and even that sportive kind of war, carried on among wrestlers, boxers, cudgel-players, gladiators, is regulated by fixed principles. common interest and utility beget infallibly a standard of right and wrong among the parties concerned.
and it goes even further than that: men can't even murder each other without rules and maxims and an idea of justice and honour. war has its laws as well as peace; and even the kind of war-for-amusement that is carried on among wrestlers, boxers and gladiators is regulated by fixed principles. the people concerned have some interests in common, and thus a shared notion of what is useful; and from this there inevitably arises a standard of right and wrong among them.

section v. why utility pleases.
section 5. why utility pleases

part i.
part 1

it seems so natural a thought to ascribe to their utility the praise, which we bestow on the social virtues, that one would expect to meet with this principle everywhere in moral writers, as the chief foundation of their reasoning and enquiry. in common life, we may observe, that the circumstance of utility is always appealed to; nor is it supposed, that a greater eulogy can be given to any man, than to display his usefulness to the public, and enumerate the services, which he has performed to mankind and society. what praise, even of an inanimate form, if the regularity and elegance of its parts destroy not its fitness for any useful purpose! and how satisfactory an apology for any disproportion or seeming deformity, if we can show the necessity of that particular construction for the use intended! a ship appears more beautiful to an artist, or one moderately skilled in navigation, where its prow is wide and swelling beyond its poop, than if it were framed with a precise geometrical regularity, in contradiction to all the laws of mechanics. a building, whose doors and windows were exact squares, would hurt the eye by that very proportion; as ill adapted to the figure of a human creature, for whose service the fabric was intended.
we praise the social virtues because of their utility that's such a natural thought that one would expect to meet with it everywhere in moral writers, as the main basis for their reasoning and enquiry. in ordinary everyday life the utility of conduct is always appealed to, and we can't think of any greater eulogy to give to any man than to display his usefulness to the public, and list the services he has done for mankind and society. even our praise for the regularity and elegance of an inanimate form is conditional on those features not destroying the thing's fitness for any useful purpose. and what a satisfactory apology we can make for any disproportion or seeming ugliness, if we can show that the feature in question was needed for the intended use! a ship appears more beautiful to an artist, or to anyone moderately skilled in navigation, if its prow is wider than its stern than it would if it were built with precise geometrical regularity. if a building's doors and windows were exact squares, it would hurt the eye just because of that squareness, which is ill-adapted to the shape of a human being, for whose use the building was intended.

what wonder then, that a man, whose habits and conduct are hurtful to society, and dangerous or pernicious to every one who has an intercourse with him, should, on that account, be an object of disapprobation, and communicate to every spectator the strongest sentiment of disgust and hatred.
so it's not surprising that a man whose habits and conduct are harmful to society, and dangerous or harmful to everyone who has any connection with him, should for that reason be an object of disapproval, communicating to every spectator the strongest sentiment or feeling of disgust and hatred.

but perhaps the difficulty of accounting for these effects of usefulness, or its contrary, has kept philosophers from admitting them into their systems of ethics, and has induced them rather to employ any other principle, in explaining the origin of moral good and evil. but it is no just reason for rejecting any principle, confirmed by experience, that we cannot give a satisfactory account of its origin, nor are able to resolve it into other more general principles. and if we would employ a little thought on the present subject, we need be at no loss to account for the influence of utility, and to deduce it from principles, the most known and avowed in human nature. from the apparent usefulness of the social virtues, it has readily been inferred by sceptics, both ancient and modern, that all moral distinctions arise from education, and were, at first, invented, and afterwards encouraged, by the art of politicians, in order to render men tractable, and subdue their natural ferocity and selfishness, which incapacitated them for society. this principle, indeed, of precept and education, must so far be owned to have a powerful influence, that it may frequently increase or diminish, beyond their natural standard, the sentiments of approbation or dislike; and may even, in particular instances, create, without any natural principle, a new sentiment of this kind; as is evident in all superstitious practices and observances: but that all moral affection or dislike arises from this origin, will never surely be allowed by any judicious enquirer. had nature made no such distinction, founded on the original constitution of the mind, the words, honourable and shameful, lovely and odious, noble and despicable, had never had place in any language; nor could politicians, had they invented these terms, ever have been able to render them intelligible, or make them convey any idea to the audience. so that nothing can be more superficial than this paradox of the sceptics; and it were well, if, in the abstruser studies of logic and metaphysics, we could as easily obviate the cavils of that sect, as in the practical and more intelligible sciences of politics and morals. the social virtues must, therefore, be allowed to have a natural beauty and amiableness, which, at first, antecedent to all precept or education, recommends them to the esteem of uninstructed mankind, and engages their affections. and as the public utility of these virtues is the chief circumstance, whence they derive their merit, it follows, that the end, which they have a tendency to promote, must be some way agreeable to us, and take hold of some natural affection. it must please, either from considerations of self-interest, or from more generous motives and regards.
ancient and modern sceptics have inferred from the apparent usefulness of the social virtues that all moral distinctions arise from cultural influence, and that they were first invented and then encouraged by the skill of politicians, so as to make men manageable and to subdue the natural ferocity and selfishness which had made them unfit for society. it's true that this principle of instruction and upbringing has a powerful influence, so that it can often (1) make the sentiments of approval or dislike greater or smaller than they would have been if left to nature; and sometimes it can even (2) create a new sentiment of approval or dislike, one that owes nothing to any natural principle which is what happens in all superstitious practices and observances. but surely no thoughtful enquirer would think that all moral affection or dislike arises from this origin. if nature hadn't made any such distinction, based on the original constitution of the mind, language would not have contained the words honourable and shameful, lovely and odious, noble and despicable; and if politicians had invented these terms they could never have made them intelligible to anyone. so this paradox of the sceptics is just very superficial. it isn't hard to fend off the nit-picking of that sect in the context of politics and morals; it would be good if we deal with them as well in the context of the theoretical and less intelligible sciences of logic and metaphysics! so we have to acknowledge that the social virtues have a natural beauty and amiableness, which right from the outset before any instruction or cultural input attracts the respect and affection of mankind. and because the chief source of the merit of these virtues is their public utility, it follows that the end that they tend to promote must be in some way agreeable to us, taking hold of some natural affection. public utility must please either for self-interested reasons or from more generous motives.

it has often been asserted, that, as every man has a strong connexion with society, and perceives the impossibility of his solitary subsistence, he becomes, on that account, favourable to all those habits or principles, which promote order in society, and insure to him the quiet possession of so inestimable a blessing, as much as we value our own happiness and welfare, as much must we applaud the practice of justice and humanity, by which alone the social confederacy can be maintained, and every man reap the fruits of mutual protection and assistance. this deduction of morals from self-love, or a regard to private interest, is an obvious thought, and has not arisen wholly from the wanton sallies and sportive assaults of the sceptics. to mention no others, polybius, one of the gravest and most judicious, as well as most moral writers of antiquity, has assigned this selfish origin to all our sentiments of virtue. but though the solid practical sense of that author, and his aversion to all vain subtilties, render his authority on the present subject very considerable; yet is not this an affair to be decided by authority, and the voice of nature and experience seems plainly to oppose the selfish theory.
it has often been maintained that because every man has a strong connection with society, and sees that he can't possibly survive in isolation, he favours all the habits or principles that promote order in society and give him the quiet possession of this priceless blessing, however much we value our own happiness and welfare, we must to that extent applaud the practice of justice and humanity, which is our only way of maintaining the social confederacy and getting for every man the advantages of mutual protection and assistance. this derivation of morals from a concern for one's own interests is an obvious thought, and it hasn't arisen wholly from the irresponsible teasing attacks of the sceptics. to mention no others, polybius one of the gravest and most judicious writers of antiquity, as well as one of the most moral has traced all our sentiments of virtue to this selfish origin. (this is in book 6, chapter 6, of his histories.) but though the solid practical sense of that author, and his dislike of vain subtleties, give him considerable authority on the present subject, this isn't something to be settled by authority, and the voice of nature and experience seems plainly to oppose the selfish theory.

we frequently bestow praise on virtuous actions, performed in very distant ages and remote countries; where the utmost subtilty of imagination would not discover any appearance of self-interest, or find any connexion of our present happiness and security with events so widely separated from us.
we often praise virtuous actions that were performed long ago and far away, where the utmost subtlety of imagination couldn't discover any appearance of self-interest, or find any way of connecting our present happiness and security with events so widely separated from us.

a generous, a brave, a noble deed, performed by an adversary, commands our approbation; while in its consequences it may be acknowledged prejudicial to our particular interest.
when an adversary does something generous, brave, noble, we approve his action even if we know that its consequences will go against our particular interests.

where private advantage concurs with general affection for virtue, we readily perceive and avow the mixture of these distinct sentiments, which have a very different feeling and influence on the mind. we praise, perhaps, with more alacrity, where the generous humane action contributes to our particular interest: but the topics of praise, which we insist on, are very wide of this circumstance. and we may attempt to bring over others to our sentiments, without endeavouring to convince them, that they reap any advantage from the actions which we recommend to their approbation and applause.
in any case where private advantage goes along with our general affection for virtue, we easily see and acknowledge the mixture of these distinct sentiments, which feel different and have different influences on the mind. we are perhaps quicker to praise generous humane actions that further our own interests; but those interests come nowhere near to explaining the topics of praise that we insist on. and we can try to bring other people over to our sentiments without trying to convince them that they get any advantage from the actions that we are presenting for their approval and applause.

frame the model of a praiseworthy character, consisting of all the most amiable moral virtues: give instances, in which these display themselves after an eminent and extraordinary manner: you readily engage the esteem and approbation of all your audience, who never so much as enquire in what age and country the person lived, who possessed these noble qualities: a circumstance, however, of all others, the most material to self-love, or a concern for our own individual happiness. once on a time, a statesman, in the shock and contest of parties, prevailed so far as to procure, by his eloquence, the banishment of an able adversary; whom he secretly followed, offering him money for his support during his exile, and soothing him with topics of consolation in his misfortunes. alas! cries the banished statesman, with what regret must i leave my friends in this city, where even enemies are so generous! virtue, though in an enemy, here pleased him: and we also give it the just tribute of praise and approbation; nor do we retract these sentiments, when we hear, that the action passed at athens, about two thousand years ago, and that the persons names were eschines and demosthenes.
if you describe the model of a praiseworthy character, consisting of all the most lovable moral virtues; and give examples in which these virtues display themselves in an extraordinary manner; you will easily elicit esteem and approval from all your audience, without their even asking when and where this noble person lived. yet when and where are absolutely crucial to self-love, i.e. the concern for one's own individual happiness. here's an example of what i mean: there was a statesman who, in the shock and contest of party-political conflict, managed through his eloquence to get an able adversary banished. he secretly followed the adversary, offering him money for his support during his exile and consolation in his misfortunes. alas! cried the banished statesman, how i regret leaving myfriends in this city, where even enemies are so generous!.

it is but a weak subterfuge, when pressed by these facts and arguments, to say, that we transport ourselves, by the force of imagination, into distant ages and countries, and consider the advantage, which we should have reaped from these characters, had we been contemporaries, and had any commerce with the persons. it is not conceivable, how a real sentiment or passion can ever arise from a known imaginary interest; especially when our real interest is still kept in view, and is often acknowledged to be entirely distinct from the imaginary, and even sometimes opposite to it.
we give this conduct the praise and approval that it deserves; and we don't retract these sentiments when we learn that all this happened in athens about two thousand years ago, and that the men involved were eschines and demosthenes. when pressed by these facts and arguments, a defender of the self-interest theory of morality might say: we transport ourselves by the force of imagination into distant times and places, and think about the advantage that we would have reaped from these characters if we had been contemporaries and had been involved in the situation. this is a dodge, and a weak one at that. it is not conceivable how a real sentiment or passion could arise in us from what we know to be an imaginary interest; especially when our real interest is still kept in view, and is often acknowledged to be entirely distinct from the imaginary one and sometimes even opposite to it.

a man, brought to the brink of a precipice, cannot look down without trembling; and the sentiment of imaginary danger actuates him, in opposition to the opinion and belief of real safety. but the imagination is here assisted by the presence of a striking object; and yet prevails not, except it be also aided by novelty, and the unusual appearance of the object. custom soon reconciles us to heights and precipices, and wears off these false and delusive terrors. the reverse is observable in the estimates which we form of characters and manners; and the more we habituate ourselves to an accurate scrutiny of morals, the more delicate feeling do we acquire of the most minute distinctions between vice and virtue. such frequent occasion, indeed, have we, in common life, to pronounce all kinds of moral determinations, that no object of this kind can be new or unusual to us; nor could any false views or prepossessions maintain their ground against an experience, so common and familiar. experience being chiefly what forms the associations of ideas, it is impossible that any association could establish and support itself, in direct opposition to that principle.
a man who is brought to the brink of a precipice can't look down without trembling; and the sentiment of imaginary danger drives him, in opposition to his belief that he is really safe. this may look like a real example of something i have said to be inconceivable, but it isn't really, because (1) it has a special feature: in this case the imagination is helped by the presence of a striking object the cliff-face and the sheer drop; and also because (2) it is really a different phenomenon: even the striking object won't have this effect unless it is, for this man, somewhat unusual and unfamiliar. custom soon reconciles us to heights and precipices, and wears off these false and delusive terrors. in our estimates of characters and conduct, the reverse is the case: the oftener we engage in careful scrutiny of morals, the more delicate is the feeling we acquire of the most minute differences between vice and virtue. indeed, in everyday life we so often express all kinds of moral determinations that nothing of this kind could be new or unusual to us. and no false views or prejudices could hold their ground against experience that is so common and familiar. what mainly forms associations of ideas is experience, so that no association could possibly be established and survive in direct opposition to experience.

usefulness is agreeable, and engages our approbation. this is a matter of fact, confirmed by daily observation. but, useful? for what? for somebody's interest, surely. whose interest then? not our own only: for our approbation frequently extends farther. it must, therefore, be the interest of those, who are served by the character or action approved of; and these we may conclude, however remote, are not totally indifferent to us. by opening up this principle, we shall discover one great source of moral distinctions.
usefulness is agreeable, and elicits our approval. this is a matter of fact, confirmed by daily observation. but, useful? for what? for somebody's interest, surely. whose interest then? not only our own; for our approval frequently extends beyond our own interests. so it must be the interests of those who benefit from the character or action we approve of; from which we can conclude that the welfare of those people, however far away they are in time or space, is not a matter of total indifference to us. by opening up this principle we shall discover one great source of moral distinctions.

part ii.
part 2

self-love is a principle in human nature of such extensive energy, and the interest of each individual is, in general, so closely connected with that of the community, that those philosophers were excusable, who fancied that all our concern for the public might be resolved into a concern for our own happiness and preservation. they saw every moment, instances of approbation or blame, satisfaction or displeasure towards characters and actions; they denominated the objects of these sentiments, virtues, or vices; they observed, that the former had a tendency to increase the happiness, and the latter the misery of mankind; they asked, whether it were possible that we could have any general concern for society, or any disinterested resentment of the welfare or injury of others; they found it simpler to consider all these sentiments as modifications of self-love; and they discovered a pretence, at least, for this unity of principle, in that close union of interest, which is so observable between the public and each individual.
self-love is such a busily energetic drive in human nature, and the interest of each individual is usually so closely connected with that of the community, that there was an excuse for the philosophers who thought that all our concern for the public might ultimately come down to a concern for our own happiness and preservation. here's how they arrived at that thought. they saw every moment instances of approval or blame, satisfaction or displeasure, towards characters and actions. they called the objects of these sentiments virtues or vices. they saw that virtues tended to increase the happiness of mankind, and that vices tended to increase mankind's misery. they asked themselves could it be that we have any general concern for society, or any disinterested resentment of the harm that comes to others? and they found it simpler to regard all these sentiments as special cases of self-love, and discovered an excuse (at least) for this unifying move in the fact that the interests of any individual are so often closely linked to the interests of the public.

but notwithstanding this frequent confusion of interests, it is easy to attain what natural philosophers, after lord bacon, have affected to call the experimentum crucis, or that experiment which points out the right way in any doubt or ambiguity. we have found instances, in which private interest was separate from public; in which it was even contrary: and yet we observed the moral sentiment to continue, notwithstanding this disjunction of interests. and wherever these distinct interests sensibly concurred, we always found a sensible increase of the sentiment, and a more warm affection to virtue, and detestation of vice, or what we properly call, gratitude and revenge. compelled by these instances, we must renounce the theory, which accounts for every moral sentiment by the principle of self-love. we must adopt a more public affection, and allow, that the interests of society are not, even on their own account, entirely indifferent to us. usefulness is only a tendency to a certain end; and it is a contradiction in terms, that anything pleases as means to an end, where the end itself no wise affects us. if usefulness, therefore, be a source of moral sentiment, and if this usefulness be not always considered with a reference to self; it follows, that everything, which contributes to the happiness of society, recommends itself directly to our approbation and good-will. here is a principle, which accounts, in great part, for the origin of morality: and what need we seek for abstruse and remote systems, when there occurs one so obvious and natural?
despite this frequent mixing of interests, however, it is easy to perform what natural scientists following bacon call a crucial experiment, one that points out the right way in any doubt or ambiguity. we have found cases where someone's private interest was different from even contrary to the public interest, and where nevertheless the moral sentiment stayed steady, despite this divergence of interests. and whenever these distinct interests are seen to coincide, we always find a noticeable increase in the sentiment, a warmer affection for virtue, a more intense detestation of vice feelings that are properly called gratitude and revenge. under pressure from these examples we have to reject the theory that accounts for every moral sentiment in terms of self-love. we must make room for a more publicaffection, and allow that we have some concern for the interests of society, considered just in itself. usefulness is only a tendency to lead to a certain result; and it is a contradiction in terms to say i am pleased with x as a means to y, though y itself is something i am not concerned with. thus, if usefulness is a source of moral sentiment, and if this usefulness is not always thought of in terms of useful to me, it follows that anything that contributes to the happiness of society recommends itself directly to our approval and good-will. here is a drive within us that accounts in great part for the origin of morality. why should we look for abstruse and remote systems when such an obvious and natural one lies ready to hand?

have we any difficulty to comprehend the force of humanity and benevolence? or to conceive, that the very aspect of happiness, joy, prosperity, gives pleasure; that of pain, suffering, sorrow, communicates uneasiness? the human countenance, says horace, borrows smiles or tears from the human countenance. reduce a person to solitude, and he loses all enjoyment, except either of the sensual or speculative kind; and that because the movements of his heart are not forwarded by correspondent movements in his fellow-creatures. the signs of sorrow and mourning, though arbitrary, affect us with melancholy; but the natural symptoms, tears and cries and groans, never fail to infuse compassion and uneasiness. and if the effects of misery touch us in so lively a manner; can we be supposed altogether insensible or indifferent towards its causes; when a malicious or treacherous character and behaviour are presented to us?
sympathy is it hard for us to understand the force of humanity and benevolence? or to take in that the very look of happiness, joy and prosperity gives pleasure; the very look of pain, suffering and sorrow communicates uneasiness? the latin poet horace said that the human countenance borrows smiles or tears from the human countenance human faces laugh with those who laugh, and weep with those who weep. if you reduce a person to solitude, he will lose almost all enjoyment, because his emotions aren't helped along by corresponding emotions in his fellow-creatures. (i said almost all because he might still have intellectual pleasures, e.g. from solving a mathematical problem, and sensual pleasures, e.g. feeling warm and well fed.) even when the signs of sorrow and mourning are arbitrary, they still make us sad; and the natural symptoms, tears and cries and groans, never fail to create compassion and uneasiness in other people's minds. and if the effects of misery affect us in such a lively manner, can we be supposed to be entirely unfeeling or indifferent towards its causes when a malicious or treacherous character and conduct are presented to us?

we enter, i shall suppose, into a convenient, warm, well-contrived apartment: we necessarily receive a pleasure from its very survey; because it presents us with the pleasing ideas of ease, satisfaction, and enjoyment. the hospitable, good-humoured, humane landlord appears. this circumstance surely must embellish the whole; nor can we easily forbear reflecting, with pleasure, on the satisfaction which results to every one from his intercourse and good-offices.
suppose we enter a convenient, warm, well-designed apartment. we have to get pleasure just from seeing it, because it presents us with the pleasing ideas of ease, satisfaction and enjoyment. the hospitable, good-humoured, humane landlord appears, and this event must surely make the whole even more attractive; and we can't easily forbear reflecting with pleasure on the satisfaction that everyone gets from their dealings with him.

his whole family, by the freedom, ease, confidence, and calm enjoyment, diffused over their countenances, sufficiently express their happiness. i have a pleasing sympathy in the prospect of so much joy, and can never consider the source of it, without the most agreeable emotions.
his whole family show their happiness by the freedom, ease, confidence and calm enjoyment expressed in their faces. i have a pleasing sympathy in the prospect of so much joy, and can't think of the source of it without having the most agreeable emotions.

he tells me, that an oppressive and powerful neighbour had attempted to dispossess him of his inheritance, and had long disturbed all his innocent and social pleasures. i feel an immediate indignation arise in me against such violence and injury.
he tells me that an oppressive and powerful neighbour tried to dispossess him of his inheritance, and for years disturbed all his innocent and social pleasures. i feel an immediate indignation arise in me against such violence and injury.

but it is no wonder, he adds, that a private wrong should proceed from a man, who had enslaved provinces, depopulated cities, and made the field and scaffold stream with human blood. i am struck with horror at the prospect of so much misery, and am actuated by the strongest antipathy against its author.
he adds that it isn't surprising that a private wrong should come from a man who has enslaved provinces, depopulated cities, and made the battle-field and the scaffold stream with human blood. i am struck with horror at the prospect of so much misery, and am driven by the strongest hostility towards its author.

in general, it is certain, that, wherever we go, whatever we reflect on or converse about, everything still presents us with the view of human happiness or misery, and excites in our breast a sympathetic movement of pleasure or uneasiness. in our serious occupations, in our careless amusements, this principle still exerts its active energy.
wherever we go, whatever we think or talk about, just about everything presents us with a view of human happiness or misery, and arouses in us a sympathetic surge of pleasure or uneasiness. in our serious occupations, and in our careless amusements, this principle still exerts its active energy.

a man who enters the theatre, is immediately struck with the view of so great a multitude, participating of one common amusement; and experiences, from their very aspect, a superior sensibility or disposition of being affected with every sentiment, which he shares with his fellow-creatures.
sympathy and the arts a man who enters a theatre is immediately impressed by the view of so many people sharing in one common pastime; and he experiences, just from the look of them, a heightening of his disposition to have every sentiment or feeling that his fellow-creatures have.

he observes the actors to be animated by the appearance of a full audience, and raised to a degree of enthusiasm, which they cannot command in any solitary or calm moment.
he notices that the actors are energised by the appearance of a full house, and raised to a level of enthusiasm that they can't command when they are calm and alone.

every movement of the theatre, by a skilful poet, is communicated, as it were by magic, to the spectators; who weep, tremble, resent, rejoice, and are inflamed with all the variety of passions, which actuate the several personages of the drama.
if the play is skillfully written, every emotion represented on the stage is communicated to the spectators, as though by magic. the spectators weep, tremble, resent, rejoice, and are inflamed with all the variety of passions that drive the characters in the drama.

where any event crosses our wishes, and interrupts the happiness of the favourite characters, we feel a sensible anxiety and concern. but where their sufferings proceed from the treachery, cruelty, or tyranny of an enemy, our breasts are affected with the liveliest resentment against the author of these calamities. it is here esteemed contrary to the rules of art to represent anything cool and indifferent. a distant friend, or a confident, who has no immediate interest in the catastrophe, ought, if possible, to be avoided by the poet; as communicating a like indifference to the audience, and checking the progress of the passions.
when an event in the play goes against our wishes and interrupts the happiness of our favourite characters, we are conscious of feeling anxiety and concern. if their sufferings come from the treachery, cruelty or tyranny of an enemy, we experience intense resentment against the enemy. it is regarded as contrary to the rules of art to represent a calamity in a cool and indifferent manner. a distant friend or a confidant who has nothing immediately at stake in the catastrophe ought, if possible, to be avoided by the playwright, because such a character might communicate a similar indifference to the audience.

few species of poetry are more entertaining than pastoral; and every one is sensible, that the chief source of its pleasure arises from those images of a gentle and tender tranquillity, which it represents in its personages, and of which it communicates a like sentiment to the reader. sannazarius, who transferred the scene to the sea-shore, though he presented the most magnificent object in nature, is confessed to have erred in his choice. the idea of toil, labour, and danger, suffered by the fishermen, is painful; by an unavoidable sympathy, which attends every conception of human happiness or misery.
few species of poetry are more entertaining than the pastoral, and we are all aware that the chief source of its pleasure arises from the images of a gentle and tender tranquillity that it represents in its characters, communicating a similar sentiment to the reader. the italian poet sannazaro in his piscatory eclogues shifted the scene from gentle pleasant meadows to the sea-shore; this let him present the ocean, the most magnificent object in nature, but it is agreed that it was a wrong choice. the idea of the toil, labour and danger suffered by the fishermen is painful to the reader because of the unavoidable sympathy that accompanies every conception of human happiness or misery.

when i was twenty, says a french poet, ovid was my favourite: now i am forty, i declare for horace. we enter, to be sure, more readily into sentiments, which resemble those we feel every day: but no passion, when well represented, can be entirely indifferent to us; because there is none, of which every man has not, within him, at least the seeds and first principles. it is the business of poetry to bring every affection near to us by lively imagery and representation, and make it look like truth and reality: a certain proof, that, wherever that reality is found, our minds are disposed to be strongly affected by it.
no passion, when well represented, can be entirely indifferent to us; because every man has within him at least the seeds and first principles of every passion. it's poetry's business to bring every affection near to us by lively imagery and representation, making it look like truth and reality; which is a certain proof that wherever reality itself is found. our minds are disposed to be strongly affected by it.

any recent event or piece of news, by which the fate of states, provinces, or many individuals is affected, is extremely interesting even to those whose welfare is not immediately engaged. such intelligence is propagated with celerity, heard with avidity, and enquired into with attention and concern. the interest of society appears, on this occasion, to be in some degree the interest of each individual. the imagination is sure to be affected; though the passions excited may not always be so strong and steady as to have great influence on the conduct and behaviour.
any recent event that affects the fate of states, provinces or many individuals is extremely interesting even to those whose welfare is not directly involved. news of such an event is quickly spread, eagerly heard, and enquired into with attention and concern. on such an occasion the interest of society appears to be to some extent the interest of each individual. the imagination is sure to be affected, though the passions that are aroused may not always be strong and steady enough to have much influence on behaviour.

the perusal of a history seems a calm entertainment; but would be no entertainment at all, did not our hearts beat with correspondent movements to those which are described by the historian.
reading a history book seems like a calm entertainment; but it wouldn't entertain at all if the reader didn't have feelings corresponding to those that the historian describes.

thucydides and guicciardin support with difficulty our attention; while the former describes the trivial encounters of the small cities of greece, and the latter the harmless wars of pisa. the few persons interested and the small interest fill not the imagination, and engage not the affections. the deep distress of the numerous athenian army before syracuse; the danger which so nearly threatens venice; these excite compassion; these move terror and anxiety.
it's hard to read thucydides or guicciardin attentively while one describes trivial clashes between small cities of greece, and the other describes the harmless wars between pisa and florence. not many people are involved, and the interest is small, so these passages don't fill our imagination or bring our feelings into play. but the deep distress of the large athenian army that attacked syracuse, and the danger that constituted such a strong threat to venice these arouse compassion; these move terror and anxiety.

the indifferent, uninteresting style of suetonius, equally with the masterly pencil of tacitus, may convince us of the cruel depravity of nero or tiberius: but what a difference of sentiment! while the former coldly relates the facts; and the latter sets before our eyes the venerable figures of a soranus and a thrasea, intrepid in their fate, and only moved by the melting sorrows of their friends and kindred. what sympathy then touches every human heart! what indignation against the tyrant, whose causeless fear or unprovoked malice gave rise to such detestable barbarity!
we can become convinced of the cruel depravity of the roman emperors nero and tiberius by the cool uninvolving style of suetonius as well as by the masterly writings of tacitus. but what a difference in our feelings! suetonius coldly relates the facts; whereas tacitus sets before our eyes the venerable figures of soranus and thrasea two of nero's innocent victims who faced their fate bravely, and were moved only by the melting sorrows of their friends and families. what sympathy then touches every human heart! what indignation against the tyrant whose ungrounded fear or unprovoked malice gave rise to such detestable barbarity!

if we bring these subjects nearer: if we remove all suspicion of fiction and deceit: what powerful concern is excited, and how much superior, in many instances, to the narrow attachments of self-love and private interest! popular sedition, party zeal, a devoted obedience to factious leaders; these are some of the most visible, though less laudable effects of this social sympathy in human nature.
if we shift from plays and history-books, and look at reallife events that we observe for ourselves, powerful concern is aroused, and how much stronger it often is than the narrow attachments of self-love and self-interest! popular uprisings, party zeal, devoted obedience to leaders of groups these are some of the most visible effects (though not the most commendable!) of this social sympathy in human nature.

the frivolousness of the subject too, we may observe, is not able to detach us entirely from what carries an image of human sentiment and affection.
our feelings are somewhat engaged by anything that carries an image of human sentiment and affection, even when the subject is fairly trivial.

when a person stutters, and pronounces with difficulty, we even sympathize with this trivial uneasiness, and suffer for him. and it is a rule in criticism, that every combination of syllables or letters, which gives pain to the organs of speech in the recital, appears also from a species of sympathy harsh and disagreeable to the ear. nay, when we run over a book with our eye, we are sensible of such unharmonious composition; because we still imagine, that a person recites it to us, and suffers from the pronunciation of these jarring sounds. so delicate is our sympathy!
when a person stutters, we sympathize with this trivial uneasiness and suffer for him. and it is a rule in criticism that every combination of syllables or letters that is hard to pronounce sounds harsh and disagreeable to the ear, apparently because of a sort of sympathy. indeed, when we skim a book with our eye, we notice such unharmonious composition because we still imagine that someone is reading it aloud to us and having a hard time pronouncing these jarring sounds. so delicate is our sympathy!

easy and unconstrained postures and motions are always beautiful: an air of health and vigour is agreeable: clothes which warm, without burthening the body; which cover, without imprisoning the limbs, are well-fashioned. in every judgement of beauty, the feelings of the person affected enter into consideration, and communicate to the spectator similar touches of pain or pleasure.
beauty, utility, sympathy relaxed and unconstrained postures and motions are always beautiful. an air of health and vigour is agreeable. clothes that warm us without burdening the body that cover us without imprisoning the limbs are well-designed. the feelings of the affected person have a role in all our judgments of beauty, communicate to the spectator similar touches of pain or pleasure. so it's not surprising that we can't make judgments about the characters and conduct of men without considering the likely consequences of their actions, and the happiness or misery they bring to society. what association of ideas could operate if the sympathy principle were totally inactive?

what wonder, then, if we can pronounce no judgement concerning the character and conduct of men, without considering the tendencies of their actions, and the happiness or misery which thence arises to society? what association of ideas would ever operate, were that principle here totally unactive.
relaxed and unconstrained postures and motions are always beautiful. an air of health and vigour is agreeable. clothes that warm us without burdening the body that cover us without imprisoning the limbs are well-designed. the feelings of the affected person have a role in all our judgments of beauty, communicate to the spectator similar touches of pain or pleasure. so it's not surprising that we can't make judgments about the characters and conduct of men without considering the likely consequences of their actions, and the happiness or misery they bring to society. what association of ideas could operate if the sympathy principle were totally inactive? sympathy and morality

if any man from a cold insensibility, or narrow selfishness of temper, is unaffected with the images of human happiness or misery, he must be equally indifferent to the images of vice and virtue: as, on the other hand, it is always found, that a warm concern for the interests of our species is attended with a delicate feeling of all moral distinctions; a strong resentment of injury done to men; a lively approbation of their welfare. in this particular, though great superiority is observable of one man above another; yet none are so entirely indifferent to the interest of their fellow-creatures, as to perceive no distinctions of moral good and evil, in consequence of the different tendencies of actions and principles. how, indeed, can we suppose it possible in any one, who wears a human heart, that if there be subjected to his censure, one character or system of conduct, which is beneficial, and another which is pernicious to his species or community, he will not so much as give a cool preference to the former, or ascribe to it the smallest merit or regard? let us suppose such a person ever so selfish; let private interest have ingrossed ever so much his attention; yet in instances, where that is not concerned, he must unavoidably feel some propensity to the good of mankind, and make it an object of choice, if everything else be equal. would any man, who is walking along, tread as willingly on another's gouty toes, whom he has no quarrel with, as on the hard flint and pavement? there is here surely a difference in the case. we surely take into consideration the happiness and misery of others, in weighing the several motives of action, and incline to the former, where no private regards draw us to seek our own promotion or advantage by the injury of our fellow-creatures. and if the principles of humanity are capable, in many instances, of influencing our actions, they must, at all times, have some authority over our sentiments, and give us a general approbation of what is useful to society, and blame of what is dangerous or pernicious. the degrees of these sentiments may be the subject of controversy; but the reality of their existence, one should think, must be admitted in every theory or system.
if a man isn't affected by images of human happiness or misery because he is emotionally cold or narrowly selfish he must be equally indifferent to the images of virtue and vice. and on the other hand we always find that a warm concern for the interests of our species is accompanied by a delicate feeling for all moral distinctions a strong resentment of harm done to men, a lively approval of their faring well. people can be seen to differ a great deal in this respect; but no-one is so entirely indifferent to the interests of his fellow-creatures that he doesn't have any sense of actions as being morally good or bad because of the results they tend to produce. if someone is confronted by two candidates for his moral judgment, one that is beneficial and another that is harmful to his species or community, it's not possible that he won't prefer the beneficial one (however coolly) and ascribe to it some measure of merit (however small). it is not possible if he wears a human heart. let us suppose someone who is ever so selfish, with his own private interests occupying ever so much of his attention; even this man, in cases where his own interests are not affected, must inevitably feel some leaning towards the good of mankind as the goal to choose other things being equal. we surely take into consideration the happiness and misery of others when we are weighing the various motives for action, and incline to the happiness side when no private concerns draw us to seek our own advantage by harming our fellow-creatures. and if the principles of humanity are capable in many instances of influencing our actions, they must always have some authority over our sentiments, and give us a general approval of what is useful to society, and disapproval of what is dangerous or harmful. the strength of these sentiments in this or that kind of case may be the subject of controversy; but there can't be a viable theory or system that denies their existence.

a creature, absolutely malicious and spiteful, were there any such in nature, must be worse than indifferent to the images of vice and virtue. all his sentiments must be inverted, and directly opposite to those, which prevail in the human species. whatever contributes to the good of mankind, as it crosses the constant bent of his wishes and desires, must produce uneasiness and disapprobation; and on the contrary, whatever is the source of disorder and misery in society, must, for the same reason, be regarded with pleasure and complacency. timon, who probably from his affected spleen more than an inveterate malice, was denominated the manhater, embraced alcibiades with great fondness. go on, my boy! cried he, acquire the confidence of the people: you will one day, i foresee, be the cause of great calamities to them. could we admit the two principles of the manicheans, it is an infallible consequence, that their sentiments of human actions, as well as of everything else, must be totally opposite, and that every instance of justice and humanity, from its necessary tendency, must please the one deity and displease the other. all mankind so far resemble the good principle, that, where interest or revenge or envy perverts not our disposition, we are always inclined, from our natural philanthropy, to give the preference to the happiness of society, and consequently to virtue above its opposite. absolute, unprovoked, disinterested malice has never perhaps place in any human breast; or if it had, must there pervert all the sentiments of morals, as well as the feelings of humanity. if the cruelty of nero be allowed entirely voluntary, and not rather the effect of constant fear and resentment; it is evident that tigellinus, preferably to seneca or burrhus, must have possessed his steady and uniform approbation.
a creature who is absolutely malicious and spiteful (if there is such a thing in nature) must be worse than merely indifferent to the images of vice and virtue. all his sentiments must be inverted, and be directly opposite to the sentiments that prevail in the human species. anything that contributes to the good of mankind will run contrary to the constant direction of his wishes and desires, and must therefore produce uneasiness and disapproval in him; and on the other hand anything that is a source of disorder and misery in society must for the same reason be regarded by him with pleasure and satisfaction. timon of athens was called the manhater, probably more because of his depression than because of inveterate malice. one day he embraced alcibiades with great fondness, saying go on, my boy! acquire the confidence of the people, then one day i foresee that you'll be the cause of great calamities to them. (this story is from plutarch.) if the manicheans were right in their view that the universe is a battlefield between two principles or gods, one good one and the other evil, these two gods would have to have totally opposite sentiments concerning human actions as well as concerning everything else. every case of justice and humanity that pleased one of the gods, because of its tendency to do good, would displease the other. all mankind so far resemble the good principle that our natural philanthropy inclines us always to give the happiness of society preference over its misery, and consequently to prefer virtue to its opposite except at times when self-interest or revenge or envy has perverted our disposition. it may be that absolute, unprovoked, disinterested malice never finds a place in any human breast; but if it does, it must there pervert all the sentiments of morals as well as the feelings of humanity. if nero's cruelty had been entirely voluntary, rather than being an effect of constant fear and resentment, it's obvious that his steady and uniform approval would have gone to the cruel, treacherous, self-serving tigellinus rather than to his two noble advisors seneca and burrhus.

a statesman or patriot, who serves our own country in our own time, has always a more passionate regard paid to him, than one whose beneficial influence operated on distant ages or remote nations; where the good, resulting from his generous humanity, being less connected with us, seems more obscure, and affects us with a less lively sympathy. we may own the merit to be equally great, though our sentiments are not raised to an equal height, in both cases. the judgement here corrects the inequalities of our internal emotions and perceptions; in like manner, as it preserves us from error, in the several variations of images, presented to our external senses. the same object, at a double distance, really throws on the eye a picture of but half the bulk; yet we imagine that it appears of the same size in both situations; because we know that on our approach to it, its image would expand on the eye, and that the difference consists not in the object itself, but in our position with regard to it. and, indeed, without such a correction of appearances, both in internal and external sentiment, men could never think or talk steadily on any subject; while their fluctuating situations produce a continual variation on objects, and throw them into such different and contrary lights and positions.
a statesman or patriot who serves our own country in our own time will always have a more passionate respect paid to him than one whose beneficial influence operated long ago or in distant countries. that's because the good resulting from the generous humanity of the latter person, being less closely connected with us, is less brightly lit for us and affects us with a less lively sympathy. we may agree that their merit is equally great, although our sentiments are not raised to the same height by both. in a case like this, our judgment corrects the inequalities of our internal emotions and perceptions; just as it preserves us from being misled by the various images presented to our external senses. when the distance from us of an object is doubled, it then throws on the eye a picture half the size of the previous one; but we imagine that it looks the same size in both situations, because we know that its image would expand if we walked towards it, and that this expansion would come not from the object itself but from our position in relation to it. indeed, without such a correction of appearances both in internal and external sentiment we could never think or talk steadily about anything, while our fluctuating situations continually varied the things we were talking about, throwing them into such different and contrary lights and positions.

the more we converse with mankind, and the greater social intercourse we maintain, the more shall we be familiarized to these general preferences and distinctions, without which our conversation and discourse could scarcely be rendered intelligible to each other. every man's interest is peculiar to himself, and the aversions and desires, which result from it, cannot be supposed to affect others in a like degree. general language, therefore, being formed for general use, must be moulded on some more general views, and must affix the epithets of praise or blame, in conformity to sentiments, which arise from the general interests of the community. and if these sentiments, in most men, be not so strong as those, which have a reference to private good; yet still they must make some distinction, even in persons the most depraved and selfish; and must attach the notion of good to a beneficent conduct, and of evil to the contrary. sympathy, we shall allow, is much fainter than our concern for ourselves, and sympathy with persons remote from us much fainter than that with persons near and contiguous; but for this very reason it is necessary for us, in our calm judgements and discourse concerning the characters of men, to neglect all these differences, and render our sentiments more public and social. besides, that we ourselves often change our situation in this particular, we every day meet with persons who are in a situation different from us, and who could never converse with us were we to remain constantly in that position and point of view, which is peculiar to ourselves. the intercourse of sentiments, therefore, in society and conversation, makes us form some general unalterable standard, by which we may approve or disapprove of characters and manners. and though the heart takes not part entirely with those general notions, nor regulates all its love and hatred by the universal abstract differences of vice and virtue, without regard to self, or the persons with whom we are more intimately connected; yet have these moral differences a considerable influence, and being sufficient, at least for discourse, serve all our purposes in company, in the pulpit, on the theatre, and in the schools.
the more we converse with other people and the larger the set of social inter-relations that we maintain, the more familiar we'll become with these general preferences and distinctions, without which we could hardly speak intelligibly to each other. every man's self-interest is special to himself, and the aversions and desires arising from it can't be supposed to mean as much to anyone else. so general language, which is formed for general use, has to be moulded on some more general views; its way of using words expressive of praise or blame have to be made to fit sentiments arising from the general interests of the community. granted that in most men these sentiments aren't as strong as the ones concerning private good, still, everyone's feelings even those of the most depraved and selfish people must make some distinction between what is generally beneficial and what isn't, attaching the notion of good to generally beneficent conduct and the notion of evil to the contrary. let's admit that sympathy is much fainter than our concern for ourselves, and that sympathy with persons far away is much fainter than sympathy with persons nearby. but for precisely this reason we must, in our calm thinking and speaking about the characters of men, neglect all those differences setting aside self/other, near/far, and then/now and make our sentiments more public and social. and it's not just that we ourselves often change our situation in one of these respects; in addition to that, we're constantly meeting up with people whose situation is different from ours, people we could never talk with if we remained constantly in the position and point of view that is special to ourselves. so the interplay of sentiments in society and conversation makes us form some general unchanging standard by which we may approve or disapprove of characters and conduct. the heart doesn't entirely adopt those general notions, or regulate all its love and hatred by the universal abstract moral differences of vice and virtue, without regard to whether something affects oneself or one's near and dear. still, these abstract moral differences have a lot of influence, and serve well enough for discourse at least, which means that they serve all our purposes in company, in the pulpit, on the stage, and in the schools.

thus, in whatever light we take this subject, the merit, ascribed to the social virtues, appears still uniform, and arises chiefly from that regard, which the natural sentiment of benevolence engages us to pay to the interests of mankind and society. if we consider the principles of the human make, such as they appear to daily experience and observation, we must, a priori, conclude it impossible for such a creature as man to be totally indifferent to the well or ill-being of his fellow-creatures, and not readily, of himself, to pronounce, where nothing gives him any particular bias, that what promotes their happiness is good, what tends to their misery is evil, without any farther regard or consideration. here then are the faint rudiments, at least, or outlines, of a general distinction between actions; and in proportion as the humanity of the person is supposed to increase, his connexion with those who are injured or benefited, and his lively conception of their misery or happiness; his consequent censure or approbation acquires proportionable vigour. there is no necessity, that a generous action, barely mentioned in an old history or remote gazette, should communicate any strong feelings of applause and admiration. virtue, placed at such a distance, is like a fixed star, which, though to the eye of reason it may appear as luminous as the sun in his meridian, is so infinitely removed as to affect the senses, neither with light nor heat. bring this virtue nearer, by our acquaintance or connexion with the persons, or even by an eloquent recital of the case; our hearts are immediately caught, our sympathy enlivened, and our cool approbation converted into the warmest sentiments of friendship and regard. these seem necessary and infallible consequences of the general principles of human nature, as discovered in common life and practice.
thus, in whatever light we take this subject, the merit ascribed to the social virtues still appears to be uniform, and arises chiefly from the concern that the natural sentiment of benevolence gets us to have for the interests of mankind and society. if we consider these drives that are built into the human make-up, as we encounter them in daily experience and observation, we must a priori conclude that a creature such as man can't be totally indifferent to the well-being or ill-being of his fellow-creatures, and must be disposed to pronounce straight off in a case where nothing gives him any particular bias that what promotes their happiness is good and what tends to their misery is bad, saying this without any qualifications or ifs or buts. here then are the faint rudiments or outlines, at least, of a general distinction between actions; and to the extent that any individual person's humanity intensifies his connection with those who are injured or benefited and the liveliness of his conception of their misery or happiness, his consequent censure or approval will become correspondingly more vigorous. a generous action barely mentioned in an old history book or a minor magazine needn't communicate any strong feelings of applause and admiration. when virtue is placed at such a distance, it's like a star: to the eye of reason it appears as luminous as the sun at noon, but it's so far away that it doesn't affect the senses with either light or heat. bring this virtue nearer, by our acquaintance or connection with the people involved or even just by an eloquent description of the case, and then our hearts are immediately caught, our sympathy enlivened, and our cool approval converted into the warmest sentiments of friendship and respect. these seem to be necessary and certain consequences of the general principles of human nature as revealed in common life and practice.

again; reverse these views and reasonings: consider the matter a posteriori; and weighing the consequences, enquire if the merit of social virtue be not, in a great measure, derived from the feelings of humanity, with which it affects the spectators. it appears to be matter of fact, that the circumstance of utility, in all subjects, is a source of praise and approbation: that it is constantly appealed to in all moral decisions concerning the merit and demerit of actions: that it is the sole source of that high regard paid to justice, fidelity, honour, allegiance, and chastity: that it is inseparable from all the other social virtues, humanity, generosity, charity, affability, lenity, mercy, and moderation: and, in a word, that it is a foundation of the chief part of morals, which has a reference to mankind and our fellow-creatures.
now let us run all this in the opposite direction. consider the matter a posteriori, thinking about consequences. doesn't the merit of social virtue come in large measure from the feelings of humanity that such virtue produces in the spectators? it seems to be a plain matter of fact that the utility of something of anything is a source of praise and approval; that utility is constantly appealed to in all moral decisions about the merit or demerit of actions; the only source of the high respect paid to justice, fidelity, honour, allegiance, chastity; inseparable from all the other social virtues humanity, generosity, charity, friendliness, mildness, affability, gentleness, mercy and moderation; and, in short, a foundation for the chief part of morals, the part concerning mankind as a whole.

it appears also, that, in our general approbation of characters and manners, the useful tendency of the social virtues moves us not by any regards to self-interest, but has an influence much more universal and extensive. it appears that a tendency to public good, and to the promoting of peace, harmony, and order in society, does always, by affecting the benevolent principles of our frame, engage us on the side of the social virtues. and it appears, as an additional confirmation, that these principles of humanity and sympathy enter so deeply into all our sentiments, and have so powerful an influence, as may enable them to excite the strongest censure and applause. the present theory is the simple result of all these inferences, each of which seems founded on uniform experience and observation.
it appears also that in our general approval of characters and conduct, the useful tendency of the social virtues doesn't move us through self-interest, but has a much more universal and extensive influence. it appears that a tendency to public good and to the promoting of peace, harmony and order in society always engages us on the side of the social virtues by working on the benevolent forces in the human make-up. and it appears, as an additional confirmation, that these drives of humanity and sympathy enter so deeply into all our sentiments, and have such a powerful influence, that they can arouse the strongest censure and applause. my present theory is the simple result of all these inferences, each of which seems to be based on uniform experience and observation.

were it doubtful, whether there were any such principle in our nature as humanity or a concern for others, yet when we see, in numberless instances, that whatever has a tendency to promote the interests of society, is so highly approved of, we ought thence to learn the force of the benevolent principle; since it is impossible for anything to please as means to an end, where the end is totally indifferent. on the other hand, were it doubtful, whether there were, implanted in our nature, any general principle of moral blame and approbation, yet when we see, in numberless instances, the influence of humanity, we ought thence to conclude, that it is impossible, but that everything which promotes the interest of society must communicate pleasure, and what is pernicious give uneasiness. but when these different reflections and observations concur in establishing the same conclusion, must they not bestow an undisputed evidence upon it?
if you aren't sure whether there's anything in our nature giving us humanity or a concern for others, think about this: we see in countless cases that anything tending to promote the interests of society is very highly approved of by people in general. that should teach you that we have a drive to benevolence, and that it is strong; because nothing could possibly please us as a means to an end if we didn't care in the least about the end. on the other hand, if you aren't sure whether there is implanted in our nature anything making us engage in moral blame and approval, think about this: we see in countless cases the influence of humaneness. from that you should infer that everything that promotes the interests of society must communicate pleasure, and what is harmful must give uneasiness. but when these different lines of thought come together in establishing the same conclusion, don't they put that conclusion beyond the reach of any doubt or denial?

it is however hoped, that the progress of this argument will bring a farther confirmation of the present theory, by showing the rise of other sentiments of esteem and regard from the same or like principles.
but i hope to provide further confirmation for this theory when i present other sentiments of admiration and respect that come from the same source or from ones like it.

part i.
notes

it seems evident, that where a quality or habit is subjected to our examination, if it appear in any respect prejudicial to the person possessed of it, or such as incapacitates him for business and action, it is instantly blamed, and ranked among his faults and imperfections. indolence, negligence, want of order and method, obstinacy, fickleness, rashness, credulity; these qualities were never esteemed by any one indifferent to a character; much less, extolled as accomplishments or virtues. the prejudice, resulting from them, immediately strikes our eye, and gives us the sentiment of pain and disapprobation.
it seems clear that when we examine a quality or habit that someone has, if it shows up as being in any respect bad for the person in question, or if it incapacitates him for business and action, we immediately blame it, and count it among his faults and imperfections. laziness, negligence, lack of order and method, obstinacy, fickleness, rashness, credulity no-one ever regarded any of these qualities as neutral features of someone's character, let alone praised them as accomplishments or virtues! their downside immediately strikes our eye, and gives us the sentiment of pain and disapproval.

pamphilus to hermippus
letter from pamphilus to hermippus

it has been remarked, my hermippus, that though the ancient philosophers conveyed most of their instruction in the form of dialogue, this method of composition has been little practised in later ages, and has seldom succeeded in the hands of those who have attempted it. accurate and regular argument, indeed, such as is now expected of philosophical inquirers, naturally throws a man into the methodical and didactic manner; where he can immediately, without preparation, explain the point at which he aims; and thence proceed, without interruption, to deduce the proofs on which it is established. to deliver a system in conversation, scarcely appears natural; and while the dialogue-writer desires, by departing from the direct style of composition, to give a freer air to his performance, and avoid the appearance of author and reader, he is apt to run into a worse inconvenience, and convey the image of pedagogue and pupil. or, if he carries on the dispute in the natural spirit of good company, by throwing in a variety of topics, and preserving a proper balance among the speakers, he often loses so much time in preparations and transitions, that the reader will scarcely think himself compensated, by all the graces of dialogue, for the order, brevity, and precision, which are sacrificed to them.
it has been remarked that though the ancient philosophers mostly taught through dialogues, the dialogue form hasn't been much used in recent times, and has seldom succeeded when people have tried it. there is a good reason for this. philosophical enquirers these days are expected to produce precise and orderly arguments; and someone aiming at those will naturally proceed with a methodical exposition in which he can, right at the outset, explain the point he wants to establish, and then proceed without interruption to present his proofs of it. it hardly seems natural to present a system in conversation. and there is also another disadvantage of the dialogue form. by departing from the direct style of composition the dialogue-writer hopes to give a freer air to his performance, and to avoid the appearance of author and reader; but he risks running into something worse, conveying the image of teacher and pupil. and if he avoids that by conducting the dispute in the natural spirit of good company, throwing in a variety of arguments, and preserving a proper balance among the speakers, he often spends so much time setting things up, and moving from one line of thought to another, that the reader will hardly think that the order, brevity, and precision which have been lost are made up for by all the graces of dialogue.

there are some subjects, however, to which dialogue-writing is peculiarly adapted, and where it is still preferable to the direct and simple method of composition.
there are some subjects, however, for which dialoguewriting is especially suitable, and preferable to the direct and simple method of composition. i shall describe two of them; apart from their suitability for the dialogue form they are utterly unalike, though it will turn out that one big topic includes both.

any point of doctrine, which is so obvious that it scarcely admits of dispute, but at the same time so important that it cannot be too often inculcated, seems to require some such method of handling it; where the novelty of the manner may compensate the triteness of the subject; where the vivacity of conversation may enforce the precept; and where the variety of lights, presented by various personages and characters, may appear neither tedious nor redundant.
any point of doctrine that is so obvious that it can hardly be questioned, but at the same time so important that it deserves to be taught repeatedly, seems to require some such method of handling it. in a dialogue, the novelty of the manner of presentation may make up for the triteness of the subject; and the liveliness of the conversation may reinforce the teaching. also, the variety of different angles from which the characters in the dialogue approach the subject may appear neither tedious nor redundant.

any question of philosophy, on the other hand, which is so obscure and uncertain, that human reason can reach no fixed determination with regard to it; if it should be treated at all, seems to lead us naturally into the style of dialogue and conversation. reasonable men may be allowed to differ, where no one can reasonably be positive. opposite sentiments, even without any decision, afford an agreeable amusement; and if the subject be curious and interesting, the book carries us, in a manner, into company; and unites the two greatest and purest pleasures of human life, study and society.
on the other hand, any question of philosophy that is so obscure and uncertain that human reason can't reach a secure conclusion about it seems to lead us naturally into the style of dialogue and conversation. reasonable men may be allowed to differ on a topic regarding which no-one can reasonably be confident. and opposing views, even without any decision as to which is right, provide an agreeable way of passing the time; and if the subject is challenging and interesting, the dialogue puts us (in a way) into the company of the characters in it. thus a dialogue can unite the two greatest and purest pleasures of human life, study and the company of others.

happily, these circumstances are all to be found in the subject of natural religion. what truth so obvious, so certain, as the being of a god, which the most ignorant ages have acknowledged, for which the most refined geniuses have ambitiously striven to produce new proofs and arguments? what truth so important as this, which is the ground of all our hopes, the surest foundation of morality, the firmest support of society, and the only principle which ought never to be a moment absent from our thoughts and meditations? but, in treating of this obvious and important truth, what obscure questions occur concerning the nature of that divine being, his attributes, his decrees, his plan of providence? these have been always subjected to the disputations of men; concerning these human reason has not reached any certain determination. but these are topics so interesting, that we cannot restrain our restless inquiry with regard to them; though nothing but doubt, uncertainty, and contradiction, have as yet been the result of our most accurate researches.
fortunately, all those features are to be found in the subject of natural religion. what truth is so obvious, so certain, as that there exists a god? people in the most ignorant ages have believed this, and the most refined geniuses have worked to produce new proofs and arguments for it. and what truth is so important as this? it is the ground of all our hopes, the surest foundation of morality, the firmest support of society, and the only principle that ought never to be a moment absent from our thoughts and meditations. but when we dig into this obvious and important truth, we run into obscure questions about the nature of that divine being, his attributes, his decrees, his plan of providence. men have always disagreed about these matters, and human reason hasn't definitely settled them. but these topics are so important that we can't restrain our restless enquiry into them, even though our most accurate researches have yielded nothing but doubt, uncertainty, and contradiction.

this i had lately occasion to observe, while i passed, as usual, part of the summer season with cleanthes, and was present at those conversations of his with philo and demea, of which i gave you lately some imperfect account. your curiosity, you then told me, was so excited, that i must, of necessity, enter into a more exact detail of their reasonings, and display those various systems which they advanced with regard to so delicate a subject as that of natural religion. the remarkable contrast in their characters still further raised your expectations; while you opposed the accurate philosophical turn of cleanthes to the careless scepticism of philo, or compared either of their dispositions with the rigid inflexible orthodoxy of demea. my youth rendered me a mere auditor of their disputes; and that curiosity, natural to the early season of life, has so deeply imprinted in my memory the whole chain and connection of their arguments, that, i hope, i shall not omit or confound any considerable part of them in the recital.
i recently had a chance to observe this that is, the suitability of natural religion as a theme for dialogue when i was spending part of the summer season with cleanthes, as i usually do, and was present at the conversations he had with philo and demea the ones i recently sketched to you. my sketch made you so curious to know more (you said) that i can't forbear to give you a more detailed report on their reasonings, and to display the various systems that they defended relating to this delicate subject of natural religion. the characters of the three men are remarkably different, and this raised your expectations even higher. you contrasted the careful philosophical methods of cleanthes with the casual scepticism of philo, and contrasted each of those with the rigid inflexible orthodoxy of demea. being young, i listened but didn't speak; and my intense youthful interest in the whole conversation imprinted on my memory the whole chain and connection of their arguments. i hope and think that my account of the conversation won't omit or muddle any considerable part of it.

part 1
part 1

after i joined the company, whom i found sitting in cleanthes's library, demea paid cleanthes some compliments on the great care which he took of my education, and on his unwearied perseverance and constancy in all his friendships. the father of pamphilus, said he, was your intimate friend: the son is your pupil; and may indeed be regarded as your adopted son, were we to judge by the pains which you bestow in conveying to him every useful branch of literature and science. you are no more wanting, i am persuaded, in prudence, than in industry. i shall, therefore, communicate to you a maxim, which i have observed with regard to my own children, that i may learn how far it agrees with your practice. the method i follow in their education is founded on the saying of an ancient, that students of philosophy ought first to learn logics, then ethics, next physics, last of all the nature of the gods. this science of natural theology, according to him, being the most profound and abstruse of any, required the maturest judgement in its students; and none but a mind enriched with all the other sciences, can safely be entrusted with it.
after i joined the group whom i found sitting in cleanthes library, demea paid cleanthes some compliments on the great care he took of my education, and on his unwearied perseverance and constancy in all his friendships. pamphilus's father, he said, was your intimate friend; the son is your pupil, and we might think him to be your adopted son if we judged by the trouble you take in bringing to him every useful branch of literature and science. i am sure that you are as prudent as you are hard-working; so i shall tell you a maxim that i have followed with regard to my own children, wanting to know how far it agrees with your upbringing of pamphilus. the method i follow in the education of my children is based on the saying of an ancient: students of philosophy ought first to learn logic, then ethics, next physics, last of all the nature of the gods. because this science of natural theology is the most profound and abstruse of any, he held, students of it need mature judgment, and it can't safely be entrusted to a mind that isn't already enriched with all the other sciences.

are you so late, says philo, in teaching your children the principles of religion? is there no danger of their neglecting, or rejecting altogether those opinions of which they have heard so little during the whole course of their education? it is only as a science, replied demea, subjected to human reasoning and disputation, that i postpone the study of natural theology. to season their minds with early piety, is my chief care; and by continual precept and instruction, and i hope too by example, i imprint deeply on their tender minds an habitual reverence for all the principles of religion. while they pass through every other science, i still remark the uncertainty of each part; the eternal disputations of men; the obscurity of all philosophy; and the strange, ridiculous conclusions, which some of the greatest geniuses have derived from the principles of mere human reason. having thus tamed their mind to a proper submission and self-diffidence, i have no longer any scruple of opening to them the greatest mysteries of religion; nor apprehend any danger from that assuming arrogance of philosophy, which may lead them to reject the most established doctrines and opinions.
do you leave it as late as that, philo asked, to teach your children the principles of religion? isn't there a risk that they will neglect or even outright reject those religious views of which they have heard so little during the whole of their education? demea replied: i postpone the study of natural theology as a science that is open to human reasoning and controversy, but only as a science. my chief concern with my children is to bring piety into their minds while they are young. by continual teaching (and also by example, i hope), i imprint deeply on their young minds a habitual reverence for all the principles of religion. while they pass through every other branch of knowledge, i comment on the uncertainty of each branch, on the eternal controversies of men, on the obscurity of all philosophy, and on the strange, ridiculous conclusions that some of the greatest geniuses have derived from the principles of mere human reason. having thus tamed their mind to a proper submission and distrust of their own abilities, i no longer hesitate to open to them the greatest mysteries of religion; and i see no risk that the presumptuous arrogance of philosophy will lead them to reject the most established doctrines and opinions.

your precaution, says philo, of seasoning your children's minds early with piety, is certainly very reasonable; and no more than is requisite in this profane and irreligious age. but what i chiefly admire in your plan of education, is your method of drawing advantage from the very principles of philosophy and learning, which, by inspiring pride and self-sufficiency, have commonly, in all ages, been found so destructive to the principles of religion. the vulgar, indeed, we may remark, who are unacquainted with science and profound inquiry, observing the endless disputes of the learned, have commonly a thorough contempt for philosophy; and rivet themselves the faster, by that means, in the great points of theology which have been taught them. those who enter a little into study and inquiry, finding many appearances of evidence in doctrines the newest and most extraordinary, think nothing too difficult for human reason; and, presumptuously breaking through all fences, profane the inmost sanctuaries of the temple. but cleanthes will, i hope, agree with me, that, after we have abandoned ignorance, the surest remedy, there is still one expedient left to prevent this profane liberty. let demea's principles be improved and cultivated: let us become thoroughly sensible of the weakness, blindness, and narrow limits of human reason: let us duly consider its uncertainty and endless contrarieties, even in subjects of common life and practice: let the errors and deceits of our very senses be set before us; the insuperable difficulties which attend first principles in all systems; the contradictions which adhere to the very ideas of matter, cause and effect, extension, space, time, motion; and in a word, quantity of all kinds, the object of the only science that can fairly pretend to any certainty or evidence. when these topics are displayed in their full light, as they are by some philosophers and almost all divines; who can retain such confidence in this frail faculty of reason as to pay any regard to its determinations in points so sublime, so abstruse, so remote from common life and experience? when the coherence of the parts of a stone, or even that composition of parts which renders it extended; when these familiar objects, i say, are so inexplicable, and contain circumstances so repugnant and contradictory; with what assurance can we decide concerning the origin of worlds, or trace their history from eternity to eternity?
your precaution of bringing piety into your children's minds early on, said philo, is certainly very reasonable; it is indeed needed in this profane and irreligious age. but what i admire most in your plan of education is your way of getting advantage from the very principles of philosophy and learning which, by inspiring pride and self-sufficiency, have often throughout the centuries been found to be so destructive to the principles of religion. they are not so with everyone, admittedly. common folk with no experience of science and profound enquiry, when they see how learned people are endlessly disputing, often have a thorough contempt for philosophy; and that makes them hold even more firmly to the great points of theology that they have been taught. people who enter a little way into study and enquiry think they find evidence to support new and extraordinary doctrines; come to think that nothing is too difficult for human reason; and presumptuously break through all fences and profane the holiest places in the temple. our best protection against such arrogance in religious matters is ignorance; but after we have abandoned that we still have as i hope cleanthes will agree one way remaining to us to prevent this profane liberty of laying down the law in religious matters. what we should do is to adopt improved and cultivated versions of demea's principles concerning our proneness to error and confusion. let us become thoroughly aware of the weakness, blindness, and narrowness of human reason, paying proper attention to its uncertainty and its endless contradictions, even in ordinary everyday subjects; let the errors and deceits of our senses be kept in mind; the insuperable difficulties surrounding the basic principles of every intellectual system; the contradictions involved in the very ideas of matter, cause and effect, extension, space, time, motion in short, all kinds of ideas of quantity of all kinds, though quantity is the topic of mathematics, the only science that has any claim to certainty or self-evidence. when these topics are displayed in their full light, as they are by some philosophers and almost all religious writers, who can remain confident enough of his frail reason to give heed to anything it tells him on topics that are so sublime, so abstruse, and so remote from common life and experience as the existence and nature of god? when we realize that really familiar things like the holding-together of the parts of a stone, or even the structure of it that makes it an extended thing are so inexplicable and involve such contradictions, how confidently can we reach conclusions about the origin of worlds, or trace their history from eternity to eternity?

while philo pronounced these words, i could observe a smile in the countenance both of demea and cleanthes. that of demea seemed to imply an unreserved satisfaction in the doctrines delivered: but, in cleanthes's features, i could distinguish an air of finesse; as if he perceived some raillery or artificial malice in the reasonings of philo.
as philo spoke, i noticed that both demea and cleanthes were smiling. demea's smile seemed to express total satisfaction with what philo was saying; but, in cleanthes features i discerned an air of knowing amusement, as though he saw in philo's reasonings some kind of teasing or trap-setting.

you propose then, philo, said cleanthes, to erect religious faith on philosophical scepticism; and you think, that if certainty or evidence be expelled from every other subject of inquiry, it will all retire to these theological doctrines, and there acquire a superior force and authority. whether your scepticism be as absolute and sincere as you pretend, we shall learn by and by, when the company breaks up: we shall then see, whether you go out at the door or the window; and whether you really doubt if your body has gravity, or can be injured by its fall; according to popular opinion, derived from our fallacious senses, and more fallacious experience. and this consideration, demea, may, i think, fairly serve to abate our ill-will to this humorous sect of the sceptics. if they be thoroughly in earnest, they will not long trouble the world with their doubts, cavils, and disputes: if they be only in jest, they are, perhaps, bad raillers; but can never be very dangerous, either to the state, to philosophy, or to religion.
you propose then, philo, said cleanthes, to erect religious faith on a basis of philosophical scepticism; and you think that if certainty is expelled from every other subject of enquiry it will retreat into these theological doctrines, where it will be stronger and more authoritative than ever. whether your scepticism is as absolute and sincere as you claim is something we shall learn later on, when we end this little meeting: we'll see then whether you leave the room through the door or the window; and whether you really doubt that your body has gravity and can be injured by its fall which is what people in general think on the basis of their fallacious senses and more fallacious experience. and i think that this consideration of the test of scepticism in everyday life can fairly serve to make us less angry with this whimsical sect of the sceptics. if they are wholly sincere, they won't trouble the world for much longer with their doubts, niggles, and disputes; and if they are only joking, they may perhaps be bad comedians but they can never be very dangerous to the state, to philosophy, or to religion.

in reality, philo, continued he, it seems certain, that though a man, in a flush of humour, after intense reflection on the many contradictions and imperfections of human reason, may entirely renounce all belief and opinion, it is impossible for him to persevere in this total scepticism, or make it appear in his conduct for a few hours. external objects press in upon him; passions solicit him; his philosophical melancholy dissipates; and even the utmost violence upon his own temper will not be able, during any time, to preserve the poor appearance of scepticism. and for what reason impose on himself such a violence? this is a point in which it will be impossible for him ever to satisfy himself, consistently with his sceptical principles. so that, upon the whole, nothing could be more ridiculous than the principles of the ancient pyrrhonians; if in reality they endeavoured, as is pretended, to extend, throughout, the same scepticism which they had learned from the declamations of their schools, and which they ought to have confined to them.
in reality, philo, he went on, it seems certain that even if a man entirely renounces all beliefs and opinions, doing this in a rush of blood to the head after intense thought about the contradictions and imperfections of human reason, he can't persevere in this total scepticism, or make it show in his conduct for more than a short time. external objects will press in on him; his passions will call to him; his philosophical gloom will dissipate; and he won't be able to preserve his poor appearance of scepticism however hard he works on himself to do so. and what reason has he to work on himself in that way? he'll never be able to answer that question satisfactorily, consistently with his sceptical principles. so that on the whole nothing could be more ridiculous than the principles of the ancient pyrrhonians, if they really did try as it has been claimed that they did to apply to the whole of life the same scepticism that they learned from class-room lectures, which is where they ought to have confined it.

in this view, there appears a great resemblance between the sects of the stoics and pyrrhonians, though perpetual antagonists; and both of them seem founded on this erroneous maxim, that what a man can perform sometimes, and in some dispositions, he can perform always, and in every disposition. when the mind, by stoical reflections, is elevated into a sublime enthusiasm of virtue, and strongly smit with any species of honour or public good, the utmost bodily pain and sufferings will not prevail over such a high sense of duty; and it is possible, perhaps, by its means, even to smile and exult in the midst of tortures. if this sometimes may be the case in fact and reality, much more may a philosopher, in his school, or even in his closet, work himself up to such an enthusiasm, and support in imagination the acutest pain or most calamitous event which he can possibly conceive. but how shall he support this enthusiasm itself? the bent of his mind relaxes, and cannot be recalled at pleasure; avocations lead him astray; misfortunes attack him unawares; and the philosopher sinks by degrees into the plebeian.
from this angle the stoics seem to be very like their perpetual antagonists the pyrrhonians. each sect seems to be based on this erroneous maxim: what a man can do sometimes and in some moods he can do always and in every mood. when stoical reflections raise the mind into a frenzy of virtue, and impress it with a sense of some kind of honour or public good, extreme bodily pain and sufferings won't prevail over such a high sense of duty; and it may even be possible for someone to smile and rejoice in the middle of being tortured. if this sometimes actually happens, how much more can a philosopher in his classroom or study work himself up to such a frenzy, and imagine himself bearing the acutest pain he can conceive! but how is he to maintain the frenzy itself? his frame of mind relaxes, and he cannot brace it up again just by wanting to do so; other activities lead him astray; misfortunes attack him unawares; and the philosopher gradually sinks into being an ordinary person.

i allow of your comparison between the stoics and skeptics, replied philo. but you may observe, at the same time, that though the mind cannot, in stoicism, support the highest flights of philosophy, yet, even when it sinks lower, it still retains somewhat of its former disposition; and the effects of the stoic's reasoning will appear in his conduct in common life, and through the whole tenor of his actions. the ancient schools, particularly that of zeno, produced examples of virtue and constancy which seem astonishing to present times.
i accept your comparison between the stoics and sceptics, replied philo. still, although the stoic mind can't maintain the highest flights of philosophy, even when it sinks lower it still retains something of its former disposition; and the effects of the stoic's reasoning will appear in his conduct in everyday life, flavouring all of his actions. the ancient schools of philosophy, particularly that of zeno, produced examples of virtue and steadfastness which seem astonishing to us today:

vain wisdom all and false philosophy. yet with a pleasing sorcery could charm pain, for a while, or anguish; and excite fallacious hope, or arm the obdurate breast with stubborn patience, as with triple steel.
vain wisdom all and false philosophy. yet with a pleasing sorcery could charm pain, for a while, or anguish; and excite fallacious hope, or arm the obdurate breast

in like manner, if a man has accustomed himself to sceptical considerations on the uncertainty and narrow limits of reason, he will not entirely forget them when he turns his reflection on other subjects; but in all his philosophical principles and reasoning, i dare not say in his common conduct, he will be found different from those, who either never formed any opinions in the case, or have entertained sentiments more favourable to human reason.
(milton, paradise lost ii) similarly, if a man has accustomed himself to sceptical thoughts about the uncertainty and narrowness of reason, he won't entirely forget them when he turns his thought onto other subjects. in all his philosophical principles and reasoning though i daren't say in his everyday conduct! he will be found to be different from those who never formed any opinions on this topic and from those who have thought about it and taken a more favourable view of human reason.

to whatever length any one may push his speculative principles of scepticism, he must act, i own, and live, and converse, like other men; and for this conduct he is not obliged to give any other reason, than the absolute necessity he lies under of so doing. if he ever carries his speculations further than this necessity constrains him, and philosophises either on natural or moral subjects, he is allured by a certain pleasure and satisfaction which he finds in employing himself after that manner. he considers besides, that every one, even in common life, is constrained to have more or less of this philosophy; that from our earliest infancy we make continual advances in forming more general principles of conduct and reasoning; that the larger experience we acquire, and the stronger reason we are endued with, we always render our principles the more general and comprehensive; and that what we call philosophy is nothing but a more regular and methodical operation of the same kind. to philosophise on such subjects, is nothing essentially different from reasoning on common life; and we may only expect greater stability, if not greater truth, from our philosophy, on account of its exacter and more scrupulous method of proceeding.
however far anyone pushes his speculative principles of scepticism, he must i admit act and live and talk like other men; but the only reason he needs to give for this conduct is that it is absolutely necessary for him behave thus. if he goes further in this direction than he needs to for sheer survival, and engages in scientific enquiries into various non-human and human subjects, this doesn't show that he is insincere in his scepticism; because his reason for this scientific theorizing is just that he is drawn to it by a certain pleasure and satisfaction that he finds in employing himself in that way. he's also aware that everyone, even in common life, is forced to conduct himself in greater or lesser degree like a scientist: that from our earliest infancy we make continual advances in forming more general principles of conduct and reasoning; that as our experience widens and our reason strengthens, we make our principles more general and comprehensive; and that what we call science is nothing but a more regular and methodical process of the same kind. to engage in scientific enquiry into such subjects is essentially the same as reasoning about common life; and we may only expect greater stability, if not greater truth, from our science, on account of its more exact and careful method of proceeding.

but when we look beyond human affairs and the properties of the surrounding bodies: when we carry our speculations into the two eternities, before and after the present state of things; into the creation and formation of the universe; the existence and properties of spirits; the powers and operations of one universal spirit existing without beginning and without end; omnipotent, omniscient, immutable, infinite, and incomprehensible: we must be far removed from the smallest tendency to scepticism not to be apprehensive, that we have here got quite beyond the reach of our faculties. so long as we confine our speculations to trade, or morals, or politics, or criticism, we make appeals, every moment, to common sense and experience, which strengthen our philosophical conclusions, and remove, at least in part, the suspicion which we so justly entertain with regard to every reasoning that is very subtle and refined. but, in theological reasonings, we have not this advantage; while, at the same time, we are employed upon objects, which, we must be sensible, are too large for our grasp, and of all others, require most to be familiarised to our apprehension. we are like foreigners in a strange country, to whom every thing must seem suspicious, and who are in danger every moment of transgressing against the laws and customs of the people with whom they live and converse. we know not how far we ought to trust our vulgar methods of reasoning in such a subject; since, even in common life, and in that province which is peculiarly appropriated to them, we cannot account for them, and are entirely guided by a kind of instinct or necessity in employing them.
but when we look beyond human affairs and the properties of the material things around us when we carry our speculations into the two eternities, before and after the present state of things, the creation and formation of the universe, the existence and properties of spirits, the powers and operations of one universal spirit existing without beginning and without end, omnipotent, omniscient, unchanging, infinite, and incomprehensible when we consider any of this, we would have to be very unsceptical not to worry that we have here gone quite beyond the reach of our faculties! so long as we confine our theorizing to trade, or morals, or politics, or criticism, we make continual appeals to common sense and experience; these appeals strengthen our philosophical and scientific conclusions, and at least partly remove the suspicion that we rightly have regarding any reasoning that is very subtle and delicate. but in theological reasonings we don't have this advantage of being able to appeal to common experience just when we have most need of it, while we are thinking about objects which we must be aware are too large for our grasp, and need more than any others to be presented to our minds in a way that will make them familiar to us. we are like foreigners in a strange country, to whom everything must seem suspicious, and who are in danger every moment of breaking the laws and customs of the people with whom they live and talk. we don't know how far we ought to trust our ordinary vulgar methods of reasoning in such a theological subject, because even in everyday life in the area that is specially suited to them we can't explain or justify them, and are entirely guided by a kind of instinct or necessity in employing them.

all sceptics pretend, that, if reason be considered in an abstract view, it furnishes invincible arguments against itself; and that we could never retain any conviction or assurance, on any subject, were not the sceptical reasonings so refined and subtle, that they are not able to counterpoise the more solid and more natural arguments derived from the senses and experience. but it is evident, whenever our arguments lose this advantage, and run wide of common life, that the most refined scepticism comes to be upon a footing with them, and is able to oppose and counterbalance them. the one has no more weight than the other. the mind must remain in suspense between them; and it is that very suspense or balance, which is the triumph of scepticism.
all sceptics claim that if reason is considered abstractly, it provides invincible arguments against itself, and that we could never retain any opinion or confidence on any subject if it were not that the sceptical reasonings in which reason discredits itself are so refined and subtle that they can't outweigh the more solid and more natural arguments derived from the senses and experience. but it is obvious that when our arguments lose this advantage of solidity and naturalness, and run wide of everyday life, the most refined scepticism comes to be on an equal footing with them and can oppose and counterbalance them. neither side has more weight than the other. the mind must remain suspended between them; and that suspense or balance is the triumph of scepticism.

but i observe, says cleanthes, with regard to you, philo, and all speculative sceptics, that your doctrine and practice are as much at variance in the most abstruse points of theory as in the conduct of common life. wherever evidence discovers itself, you adhere to it, notwithstanding your pretended scepticism; and i can observe, too, some of your sect to be as decisive as those who make greater professions of certainty and assurance. in reality, would not a man be ridiculous, who pretended to reject newton's explication of the wonderful phenomenon of the rainbow, because that explication gives a minute anatomy of the rays of light; a subject, forsooth, too refined for human comprehension? and what would you say to one, who, having nothing particular to object to the arguments of copernicus and galileo for the motion of the earth, should withhold his assent, on that general principle, that these subjects were too magnificent and remote to be explained by the narrow and fallacious reason of mankind?
but i observe with regard to you, philo, and to all theoretical sceptics, says cleanthes, that your doctrine is at odds with your behaviour just as much in the most abstruse points of theory as in the conduct of everyday life. wherever evidence is found, you adhere to it, despite your supposed scepticism; and i can observe, too, that some of your fellowsceptics are as decisive as those who claim higher levels of certainty and assurance. really, wouldn't it be ridiculous for someone to say that he rejected newton's explanation of the wonderful phenomenon of the rainbow, because that explanation gives a minute anatomy of the rays of light a subject (says this absurd sceptic) too refined for human comprehension? and what would you say to someone who, finding no fault with the arguments of copernicus and galileo for the motion of the earth, nevertheless withheld his assent on the general ground that these subjects are too magnificent and remote to be explained by the narrow and deceitful reason of mankind?

there is indeed a kind of brutish and ignorant scepticism, as you well observed, which gives the vulgar a general prejudice against what they do not easily understand, and makes them reject every principle which requires elaborate reasoning to prove and establish it. this species of scepticism is fatal to knowledge, not to religion; since we find, that those who make greatest profession of it, give often their assent, not only to the great truths of theism and natural theology, but even to the most absurd tenets which a traditional superstition has recommended to them. they firmly believe in witches, though they will not believe nor attend to the most simple proposition of euclid. but the refined and philosophical sceptics fall into an inconsistence of an opposite nature. they push their researches into the most abstruse corners of science; and their assent attends them in every step, proportioned to the evidence which they meet with. they are even obliged to acknowledge, that the most abstruse and remote objects are those which are best explained by philosophy. light is in reality anatomised. the true system of the heavenly bodies is discovered and ascertained. but the nourishment of bodies by food is still an inexplicable mystery. the cohesion of the parts of matter is still incomprehensible. these sceptics, therefore, are obliged, in every question, to consider each particular evidence apart, and proportion their assent to the precise degree of evidence which occurs. this is their practice in all natural, mathematical, moral, and political science. and why not the same, i ask, in the theological and religious? why must conclusions of this nature be alone rejected on the general presumption of the insufficiency of human reason, without any particular discussion of the evidence? is not such an unequal conduct a plain proof of prejudice and passion?
there is indeed a kind of crude and ignorant scepticism, as you rightly remarked, that gives common people a general prejudice against things they can't easily understand, and makes them reject every principle that requires elaborate reasoning to prove and establish it. this sort of scepticism is fatal to knowledge, not to religion; for we find that many of those who most strenuously profess it give their assent not only to the great truths of theism and natural theology, but even to the most absurd doctrines that traditional superstition has recommended to them. they firmly believe in witches, though they refuse to believe or attend to the most simple proposition in euclid's geometry. but the refined and philosophical sceptics fall into an inconsistency of an opposite kind. they push their researches into the most abstruse corners of science, and at every step they accept propositions in proportion to the evidence for them that they meet with. they are even obliged to admit that the most abstruse and remote objects are the ones that are best explained by science. light is in reality anatomized. the true system of the heavenly bodies is discovered. but the nourishment of bodies by food is still a mystery that we can't explain. the holding together of the parts of matter is still incomprehensible. light is abstruse, and the heavenly bodies are remote; but nourishment and the firmness of pebbles are neither. so the refined sceptics cannot draw a general line in those terms. these sceptics, therefore, are obliged in every enquiry to consider each particular bit of evidence separately, and to proportion their assent to the precise strength of the evidence they find. this is what they actually do in all natural, mathematical, moral, and political science. and why not the same, i ask, in theological and religious studies? why should we confine to them the practice of rejecting conclusions, without looking into the evidence that has been offered, on the general ground that human reason is insufficient? isn't this discriminatory attitude a plain proof of prejudice and passion?

our senses, you say, are fallacious; our understanding erroneous; our ideas, even of the most familiar objects, extension, duration, motion, full of absurdities and contradictions. you defy me to solve the difficulties, or reconcile the repugnancies which you discover in them. i have not capacity for so great an undertaking: i have not leisure for it: i perceive it to be superfluous. your own conduct, in every circumstance, refutes your principles, and shows the firmest reliance on all the received maxims of science, morals, prudence, and behaviour.
our senses, you say, are fallacious; our understanding is erroneous; our ideas even of the most familiar objects: extension, duration, motion are full of absurdities and contradictions. you defy me to solve the difficulties or reconcile the inconsistencies that you find in them. i haven't the skill for so great an undertaking; i haven't leisure for it; i see that there's no need for it. your own conduct, in every circumstance, refutes your principles, and shows the firmest reliance on all the received maxims of science, morals, prudence, and behaviour.

i shall never assent to so harsh an opinion as that of a celebrated writer, who says, that the sceptics are not a sect of philosophers: they are only a sect of liars. i may, however, affirm (i hope without offence), that they are a sect of jesters or raillers. but for my part, whenever i find myself disposed to mirth and amusement, i shall certainly choose my entertainment of a less perplexing and abstruse nature. a comedy, a novel, or at most a history, seems a more natural recreation than such metaphysical subtleties and abstractions.
i shall never accept the celebrated arnauld's extravagant statement that the sceptics are not a sect of philosophers only a sect of liars! but i will say no offence meant that they are a sect of comedians or teasers. for my part, though, whenever i find myself wanting fun and amusement, i shall certainly choose for my entertainment something less puzzling and abstruse than sceptical philosophy. a comedy, a novel, or at most a history, seems a more natural recreation than such metaphysical subtleties and abstractions.

in vain would the sceptic make a distinction between science and common life, or between one science and another. the arguments employed in all, if just, are of a similar nature, and contain the same force and evidence. or if there be any difference among them, the advantage lies entirely on the side of theology and natural religion. many principles of mechanics are founded on very abstruse reasoning; yet no man who has any pretensions to science, even no speculative sceptic, pretends to entertain the least doubt with regard to them. the copernican system contains the most surprising paradox, and the most contrary to our natural conceptions, to appearances, and to our very senses: yet even monks and inquisitors are now constrained to withdraw their opposition to it. and shall philo, a man of so liberal a genius and extensive knowledge, entertain any general undistinguished scruples with regard to the religious hypothesis, which is founded on the simplest and most obvious arguments, and, unless it meets with artificial obstacles, has such easy access and admission into the mind of man?
it is no use for the sceptic to distinguish science from common life, or one science from another. the arguments that he uses, if they are sound, hold good in each of these areas and have just as much force in one as in another. or if there is any difference among them, the advantage lies entirely on the side of theology and natural religion the advantage, that is, of having the strength to resist scepticism. many principles of mechanics are based on very abstruse reasoning, yet nobody with any degree of scientific competence claims to be in the least doubt concerning to them nor indeed does any theoretical sceptic. the copernican system contains the thesis that the sun doesn't go around the earth, which is the most surprising paradox, and the one most contrary to our natural conceptions, to appearances, and to our very senses; yet even monks and inquisitors have had to withdraw their opposition to it. then we have the religious hypothesis, which is based on the simplest and most obvious arguments, and is easily accepted by the mind of man unless it is blocked by artificial obstacles. will philo, a thoughtful and knowledgeable man, cast doubt on it because of the supposed unreliability of the human faculties in general, with no special reference to the religious hypothesis in particular?

and here we may observe, continued he, turning himself towards demea, a pretty curious circumstance in the history of the sciences. after the union of philosophy with the popular religion, upon the first establishment of christianity, nothing was more usual, among all religious teachers, than declamations against reason, against the senses, against every principle derived merely from human research and inquiry. all the topics of the ancient academics were adopted by the fathers; and thence propagated for several ages in every school and pulpit throughout christendom. the reformers embraced the same principles of reasoning, or rather declamation; and all panegyrics on the excellency of faith, were sure to be interlarded with some severe strokes of satire against natural reason. a celebrated prelate too, of the romish communion, a man of the most extensive learning, who wrote a demonstration of christianity, has also composed a treatise, which contains all the cavils of the boldest and most determined pyrrhonism. locke seems to have been the first christian who ventured openly to assert, that faith was nothing but a species of reason; that religion was only a branch of philosophy; and that a chain of arguments, similar to that which established any truth in morals, politics, or physics, was always employed in discovering all the principles of theology, natural and revealed. the ill use which bayle and other libertines made of the philosophical scepticism of the fathers and first reformers, still further propagated the judicious sentiment of mr. locke: and it is now in a manner avowed, by all pretenders to reasoning and philosophy, that atheist and sceptic are almost synonymous. and as it is certain that no man is in earnest when he professes the latter principle, i would fain hope that there are as few who seriously maintain the former.
academics, which then spread from them down the years into every school and pulpit in christendom. the reformers embraced the same principles of reasoning, or rather denunciation, and all flowery praise of the excellency of faith was sure to be spiced with some cutting jibes against natural reason. a celebrated roman catholic bishop, too, a man of the most extensive learning who wrote a demonstration of christianity, has also written a book containing all the fault-finding of the boldest and most determined pyrrhonism. it took centuries for this contempt for reason to die down. locke seems to have been the first christian to risk saying openly that faith is nothing but a species of reason, that religion is only a branch of philosophy, and that the arguments that have always been used in discovering all the principles of theology, natural and revealed, are just like those that have been used to establish truths in morals, politics, or physics. the miserable use that bayle and other free-thinkers made of the philosophical scepticism of the church fathers and first reformers namely, their use of it as a weapon against religion had the effect of widening the acceptance of locke's sensible opinion; and now all those who claim to be thinkers assert, in a way, that atheist and sceptic are almost synonymous. and just as it is certain that no man would sincerely declare himself a sceptic, i venture to hope that there are as few who seriously maintain atheism.

don't you remember, said philo, the excellent saying of lord bacon on this head? that a little philosophy, replied cleanthes, makes a man an atheist: a great deal converts him to religion. that is a very judicious remark too, said philo. but what i have in my eye is another passage, where, having mentioned david's fool, who said in his heart there is no god, this great philosopher observes, that the atheists nowadays have a double share of folly; for they are not contented to say in their hearts there is no god, but they also utter that impiety with their lips, and are thereby guilty of multiplied indiscretion and imprudence. such people, though they were ever so much in earnest, cannot, methinks, be very formidable.
don't you remember, said philo, the excellent saying of lord bacon on this topic? that a little philosophy, replied cleanthes, makes a man an atheist: a great deal converts him to religion. that's a very sensible remark too, said philo. but what i have in mind is another passage where, having mentioned david's fool who said in his heart that there is no god, this great philosopher observes that the atheists nowadays are double fools; for they aren't contented to say in their hearts that there is no god but also utter that impiety with their lips, which makes them guilty of multiplied indiscretion and imprudence. such people, however serious and sincere they are, cannot be much of a threat, i think.

but though you should rank me in this class of fools, i cannot forbear communicating a remark that occurs to me, from the history of the religious and irreligious scepticism with which you have entertained us. it appears to me, that there are strong symptoms of priestcraft in the whole progress of this affair. during ignorant ages, such as those which followed the dissolution of the ancient schools, the priests perceived, that atheism, deism, or heresy of any kind, could only proceed from the presumptuous questioning of received opinions, and from a belief that human reason was equal to every thing. education had then a mighty influence over the minds of men, and was almost equal in force to those suggestions of the senses and common understanding, by which the most determined sceptic must allow himself to be governed. but at present, when the influence of education is much diminished, and men, from a more open commerce of the world, have learned to compare the popular principles of different nations and ages, our sagacious divines have changed their whole system of philosophy, and talk the language of stoics, platonists, and peripatetics, not that of pyrrhonians and academics. if we distrust human reason, we have now no other principle to lead us into religion. thus, sceptics in one age, dogmatists in another; whichever system best suits the purpose of these reverend gentlemen, in giving them an ascendant over mankind, they are sure to make it their favourite principle, and established tenet.
but even at the risk of your counting me as one of this class of fools, i can't forbear to say something that occurs to me, arising out of the history of religious and irreligious scepticism with which you have entertained us. it seems to me that there are strong symptoms of priestcraft in that whole course of events. during ignorant ages, such as those following the abolition of the ancient schools, the priests saw that atheism, deism, or heresy of any kind could only come from the presumptuous questioning of common opinions, and from the belief that human reason is equal to every task. in those times education had a great influence over the minds of men, and was almost equal in power to the suggestions of the senses and common understanding, by which the most determined sceptic must admit that he is governed. but these days, when education has much less influence, and men's increased contacts throughout the world have taught them to compare the principles that are accepted in different nations and ages, our cunning divines have changed their whole system of philosophy, and talk the language of stoics, platonists, and aristotelians, not that of pyrrhonians and academics. if we distrust human reason, we have now no other principle to lead us into religion. these reverend gentlemen can be depended on to identify the system that best suits their purpose of keeping an ascendancy over mankind it may be scepticism in one age, dogmatism in another and making it their favourite principle and established doctrine.

it is very natural, said cleanthes, for men to embrace those principles, by which they find they can best defend their doctrines; nor need we have any recourse to priestcraft to account for so reasonable an expedient. and, surely nothing can afford a stronger presumption, that any set of principles are true, and ought to be embraced, than to observe that they tend to the confirmation of true religion, and serve to confound the cavils of atheists, libertines, and freethinkers of all denominations.
it is very natural, said cleanthes, for men to embrace the principles by which they find they can best defend their doctrines; we can account for this reasonable behaviour without dragging priestcraft into the story. and, surely nothing can afford a stronger support for the truth of a set of principles than to observe that they tend to confirm true religion, and serve to silence the complaints of atheists, libertines, and freethinkers of all kinds.

part 2
part 2

i must own, cleanthes, said demea, that nothing can more surprise me, than the light in which you have all along put this argument. by the whole tenor of your discourse, one would imagine that you were maintaining the being of a god, against the cavils of atheists and infidels; and were necessitated to become a champion for that fundamental principle of all religion. but this, i hope, is not by any means a question among us. no man, no man at least of common sense, i am persuaded, ever entertained a serious doubt with regard to a truth so certain and self-evident. the question is not concerning the being, but the nature of god. this, i affirm, from the infirmities of human understanding, to be altogether incomprehensible and unknown to us. the essence of that supreme mind, his attributes, the manner of his existence, the very nature of his duration; these, and every particular which regards so divine a being, are mysterious to men. finite, weak, and blind creatures, we ought to humble ourselves in his august presence; and, conscious of our frailties, adore in silence his infinite perfections, which eye hath not seen, ear hath not heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man to conceive. they are covered in a deep cloud from human curiosity. it is profaneness to attempt penetrating through these sacred obscurities. and, next to the impiety of denying his existence, is the temerity of prying into his nature and essence, decrees and attributes.
i must admit, cleanthes, said demea, that nothing could surprise me more than the light in which you have all along put this argument. by the whole trend and tone of your remarks, one would think you were maintaining the existence of a god against the objections of atheists and infidels; and that you felt a need to stand up for that fundamental principle of all religion. but i hope there is no question here about the existence of a god. i am sure that no man or anyway no man of common sense ever had a serious doubt regarding such a certain and self-evident truth. the question is not about the existence but about the nature of god. because of the infirmities of human understanding, i contend, the nature of god is entirely incomprehensible and unknown to us. the essence of that supreme mind, his attributes, his way of existing, his way of lasting through time all these are mysterious to men, as is everything else concerning such a divine being. finite, weak, and blind creatures such as we are ought to humble ourselves in his august presence; and, conscious of our frailties, stand in silent wonder at his infinite perfections, which eye has not seen, ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive. they are hidden from human curiosity by a deep cloud. it is insulting to god to try to penetrate these sacred obscurities. the audacity of prying into god's nature and essence, his decrees and attributes, is second only to the impiety of denying his existence.

but lest you should think that my piety has here got the better of my philosophy, i shall support my opinion, if it needs any support, by a very great authority. i might cite all the divines, almost, from the foundation of christianity, who have ever treated of this or any other theological subject: but i shall confine myself, at present, to one equally celebrated for piety and philosophy. it is father malebranche, who, i remember, thus expresses himself. one ought not so much, says he, to call god a spirit, in order to express positively what he is, as in order to signify that he is not matter. he is a being infinitely perfect: of this we cannot doubt. but in the same manner as we ought not to imagine, even supposing him corporeal, that he is clothed with a human body, as the anthropomorphites asserted, under colour that that figure was the most perfect of any; so, neither ought we to imagine that the spirit of god has human ideas, or bears any resemblance to our spirit, under colour that we know nothing more perfect than a human mind. we ought rather to believe, that as he comprehends the perfections of matter without being material.... he comprehends also the perfections of created spirits without being spirit, in the manner we conceive spirit: that his true name is, he that is; or, in other words, being without restriction, all being, the being infinite and universal.
lest you should think that my piety has here overpowered my philosophy, i shall support my opinion if it needs any support by a very great authority. i could cite in my support almost any writer since the foundation of christianity who has ever treated this or any other theological subject; but for now i shall confine myself to just one, who is equally famous for piety and philosophy. it is father malebranche, whom i remember as expressing himself thus: one ought to call god a spirit not so much to express positively what he is as to signify that he is not matter. he is an infinitely perfect being; this we cannot doubt. but just as we oughtn't to imagine, even supposing him corporeal, that he has a human body (as the anthropomorphites asserted, on the grounds that the human shape is the most perfect of any), so we oughtn't to imagine that the spirit of god has human ideas, or bears any resemblance to our spirit, on the grounds that we know nothing more perfect than a human mind. we ought rather to believe that just as he includes within himself the perfections of matter without being material, he includes within himself also the perfections of created spirits without being spirit according to our conception of spirit. we ought to believe that his true name is he that is, or in other words being without restriction, all being, the being infinite and universal.

after so great an authority, demea, replied philo, as that which you have produced, and a thousand more which you might produce, it would appear ridiculous in me to add my sentiment, or express my approbation of your doctrine. but surely, where reasonable men treat these subjects, the question can never be concerning the being, but only the nature, of the deity. the former truth, as you well observe, is unquestionable and self-evident. nothing exists without a cause; and the original cause of this universe (whatever it be) we call god; and piously ascribe to him every species of perfection. whoever scruples this fundamental truth, deserves every punishment which can be inflicted among philosophers, to wit, the greatest ridicule, contempt, and disapprobation. but as all perfection is entirely relative, we ought never to imagine that we comprehend the attributes of this divine being, or to suppose that his perfections have any analogy or likeness to the perfections of a human creature. wisdom, thought, design, knowledge; these we justly ascribe to him; because these words are honourable among men, and we have no other language or other conceptions by which we can express our adoration of him. but let us beware, lest we think that our ideas anywise correspond to his perfections, or that his attributes have any resemblance to these qualities among men. he is infinitely superior to our limited view and comprehension; and is more the object of worship in the temple, than of disputation in the schools.
after so great an authority as that, demea, replied philo, and a thousand more that you could produce, it would appear ridiculous in me to add my own view or express my approval of your doctrine. but, surely, when reasonable men discuss these subjects their topic is never the existence of god but only his nature. that he exists is, as you well observe, unquestionable and self-evident. nothing exists without a cause; and the original cause of this universe (whatever it may be) we call god, and piously ascribe to him every kind of perfection. whoever questions this fundamental truth deserves every punishment that philosophers can inflict on one another, namely, the greatest ridicule, contempt, and disapproval. but all perfection is entirely relative, so we ought never to imagine that we understand the attributes of this divine being, or to suppose that his perfections are in any way analogous or similar to the perfections of a human creature. wisdom, thought, design, knowledge it is proper for us to ascribe these to him, because those words are honourable among men, and we have no other language or other conceptions by which to express our wonder at his glory. but let us be careful not to think that our ideas of wisdom, thought, etc. in any way correspond to his perfections, or that his attributes have any resemblance to these qualities of men. he is infinitely superior to our restricted view and limited understanding, and is more the object of worship in the temple than of debate in the schools.

in reality, cleanthes, continued he, there is no need of having recourse to that affected scepticism so displeasing to you, in order to come at this determination. our ideas reach no further than our experience. we have no experience of divine attributes and operations. i need not conclude my syllogism. you can draw the inference yourself. and it is a pleasure to me (and i hope to you too) that just reasoning and sound piety here concur in the same conclusion, and both of them establish the adorably mysterious and incomprehensible nature of the supreme being.
in reality, cleanthes, he went on, we can arrive at this position without help from the pretend-scepticism that you so dislike. here is how: our ideas reach no further than our experience. we have no experience of divine attributes and operations. i needn't conclude my syllogism: you can draw the inference yourself. and it is a pleasure to me (and i hope to you too) that valid reasoning and sound piety here work together to the same conclusion, and both of them establish the wondrously mysterious and incomprehensible nature of the supreme being.

not to lose any time in circumlocutions, said cleanthes, addressing himself to demea, much less in replying to the pious declamations of philo; i shall briefly explain how i conceive this matter. look round the world: contemplate the whole and every part of it: you will find it to be nothing but one great machine, subdivided into an infinite number of lesser machines, which again admit of subdivisions to a degree beyond what human senses and faculties can trace and explain. all these various machines, and even their most minute parts, are adjusted to each other with an accuracy which ravishes into admiration all men who have ever contemplated them. the curious adapting of means to ends, throughout all nature, resembles exactly, though it much exceeds, the productions of human contrivance; of human designs, thought, wisdom, and intelligence. since, therefore, the effects resemble each other, we are led to infer, by all the rules of analogy, that the causes also resemble; and that the author of nature is somewhat similar to the mind of man, though possessed of much larger faculties, proportioned to the grandeur of the work which he has executed. by this argument a posteriori, and by this argument alone, do we prove at once the existence of a deity, and his similarity to human mind and intelligence.
i shan't beat about the bush, said cleanthes, addressing himself to demea. still less shall i reply to philo's pious speeches. what i shall do is to explain briefly how i conceive this matter. look round the world, contemplating the whole thing and every part of it; you'll find that it is nothing but one big machine subdivided into an infinite number of smaller ones, which in their turn could be subdivided to a degree beyond what human senses and faculties can trace and explain. all these various machines, and even their most minute parts, are adjusted to each other so precisely that everyone who has ever contemplated them is filled with wonder. the intricate fitting of means to ends throughout all nature is just like (though more wonderful than) the fitting of means to ends in things that have been produced by us products of human designs, thought, wisdom, and intelligence. since the effects resemble each other, we are led to infer by all the rules of analogy that the causes are also alike, and that the author of nature is somewhat similar to the mind of man, though he has much larger faculties to go with the grandeur of the work he has carried out. by this argument a posteriori, and by this argument alone, do we prove both that there is a god and that he resembles human mind and intelligence.

i shall be so free, cleanthes, said demea, as to tell you, that from the beginning, i could not approve of your conclusion concerning the similarity of the deity to men; still less can i approve of the mediums by which you endeavour to establish it. what! no demonstration of the being of god! no abstract arguments! no proofs a priori! are these, which have hitherto been so much insisted on by philosophers, all fallacy, all sophism? can we reach no further in this subject than experience and probability? i will not say that this is betraying the cause of a deity: but surely, by this affected candour, you give advantages to atheists, which they never could obtain by the mere dint of argument and reasoning.
i have to tell you, cleanthes, said demea, that from the beginning, i could not approve of your conclusion about the similarity of god to men; still less can i approve of your ways of trying to establish it. what! no demonstration that god exists! no abstract arguments! no a priori proofs! what about the ones that have in the past been so much insisted on by philosophers are they all fallacious, all mere tricks? do experience and probability mark the limit to how far we can go in this subject? i won't say that this is betraying the cause of a god; but, surely, by this show of even-handedness you provide atheists with advantages that they could never have obtained purely through argument and reasoning.

what i chiefly scruple in this subject, said philo, is not so much that all religious arguments are by cleanthes reduced to experience, as that they appear not to be even the most certain and irrefragable of that inferior kind. that a stone will fall, that fire will burn, that the earth has solidity, we have observed a thousand and a thousand times; and when any new instance of this nature is presented, we draw without hesitation the accustomed inference. the exact similarity of the cases gives us a perfect assurance of a similar event; and a stronger evidence is never desired nor sought after. but wherever you depart, in the least, from the similarity of the cases, you diminish proportionably the evidence; and may at last bring it to a very weak analogy, which is confessedly liable to error and uncertainty. after having experienced the circulation of the blood in human creatures, we make no doubt that it takes place in titius and maevius. but from its circulation in frogs and fishes, it is only a presumption, though a strong one, from analogy, that it takes place in men and other animals. the analogical reasoning is much weaker, when we infer the circulation of the sap in vegetables from our experience that the blood circulates in animals; and those, who hastily followed that imperfect analogy, are found, by more accurate experiments, to have been mistaken.
my main reservation about what cleanthes has said, philo remarked, is not so much that he bases all religious arguments on experience as that his arguments seem not to be the most certain and unbreakable even of that inferior experience-based kind. that a stone will fall, that fire will burn, that the earth has solidity, we have observed thousands of times; and when any new instance of this sort is presented we don't hesitate to draw the usual conclusion this stone will fall, this fire will burn, the earth that i am about to put my right foot on is solid. the exact similarity of the cases gives us a perfect assurance of a similar outcome; and we never want or look for stronger evidence than that. but the evidence is less strong when the cases are less than perfectly alike; any reduction in similarity, however tiny, brings a corresponding reduction in the strength of the evidence; and as we move down that scale we may eventually reach a very weak analogy, leading to a conclusion that is confessedly liable to error and uncertainty. after having observed the circulation of the blood in human creatures, we have no doubt that it circulates in titius and maevius. but from its circulation in frogs and fishes it is only a presumption though a strong one, from analogy that blood circulates in men and other animals. the analogical reasoning is even weaker when we infer the circulation of the sap in plants from our experience that the blood circulates in animals; and those who hastily followed that imperfect analogy between plants and animals have been found by more accurate experiments to have been mistaken.

if we see a house, cleanthes, we conclude, with the greatest certainty, that it had an architect or builder; because this is precisely that species of effect which we have experienced to proceed from that species of cause. but surely you will not affirm, that the universe bears such a resemblance to a house, that we can with the same certainty infer a similar cause, or that the analogy is here entire and perfect. the dissimilitude is so striking, that the utmost you can here pretend to is a guess, a conjecture, a presumption concerning a similar cause; and how that pretension will be received in the world, i leave you to consider.
if we see a house, cleanthes, we conclude with the greatest certainty that it had an architect or builder; because this is precisely the kind of effect that we have experienced as coming from that kind of cause. but surely you won't say that the universe is so like a house that we can with the same certainty infer a similar cause, or that the analogy is here entire and perfect. the unlikeness in this case is so striking that the most you can offer on the basis of it is a guess, a conjecture, a presumption about a similar cause; and i leave it to you to consider how that offering will be received in the world!

it would surely be very ill received, replied cleanthes; and i should be deservedly blamed and detested, did i allow, that the proofs of a deity amounted to no more than a guess or conjecture. but is the whole adjustment of means to ends in a house and in the universe so slight a resemblance? the economy of final causes? the order, proportion, and arrangement of every part? steps of a stair are plainly contrived, that human legs may use them in mounting; and this inference is certain and infallible. human legs are also contrived for walking and mounting; and this inference, i allow, is not altogether so certain, because of the dissimilarity which you remark; but does it, therefore, deserve the name only of presumption or conjecture?
if i granted that the proofs of the existence of a god amount to no more than a guess or conjecture, replied cleanthes, that wouldn't be well received, and i would deservedly be blamed and detested. but is it such a slight resemblance between how means are fitted to ends in a house and how they are fitted in the universe? the way things are fitted to their purposes? the order, proportion, and arrangement of every part? steps of a staircase are plainly designed so that human legs can use them in climbing; and this inference from how the steps can be used to their purpose is certain and infallible. human legs are also designed for walking and climbing; and this inference from how legs can be used to their purpose, i admit, is not quite so certain, because of the dissimilarity you have pointed out; but does that downgrade it to mere presumption or conjecture?

good god! cried demea, interrupting him, where are we? zealous defenders of religion allow, that the proofs of a deity fall short of perfect evidence! and you, philo, on whose assistance i depended in proving the adorable mysteriousness of the divine nature, do you assent to all these extravagant opinions of cleanthes? for what other name can i give them? or, why spare my censure, when such principles are advanced, supported by such an authority, before so young a man as pamphilus?
good god! exclaimed demea, interrupting him, what have we come to? earnest defenders of religion admitting that the proofs of a god fall short of being perfectly evident! and you, philo, whose help i depended on in proving the worshipful mysteriousness of god's nature do you assent to all these extreme opinions of cleanthes? for how else can i describe them? and why should i tone down my criticism when such principles are advanced, supported by such an authority as cleanthes, in the presence of such a young man as pamphilus?

you seem not to apprehend, replied philo, that i argue with cleanthes in his own way; and, by showing him the dangerous consequences of his tenets, hope at last to reduce him to our opinion. but what sticks most with you, i observe, is the representation which cleanthes has made of the argument a posteriori; and finding that that argument is likely to escape your hold and vanish into air, you think it so disguised, that you can scarcely believe it to be set in its true light. now, however much i may dissent, in other respects, from the dangerous principles of cleanthes, i must allow that he has fairly represented that argument; and i shall endeavour so to state the matter to you, that you will entertain no further scruples with regard to it.
you seem not to grasp, replied philo, that i argue with cleanthes in his own way: i hope that by showing him the dangerous consequences of his views i shall finally bring him to share our opinion. but what bothers you most, i notice, is cleanthes account of the argument a posteriori. you find that that argument in his version of it is likely to slip out of your grasp and vanish into thin air; you think cleanthes has so disguised it that you can hardly believe he has presented it properly. now, however much i may disagree in other ways with the dangerous principles of cleanthes, i must admit that he has fairly presented that argument; and i shall try to set it out for you in such a way that you will no longer view it with suspicion.

were a man to abstract from every thing which he knows or has seen, he would be altogether incapable, merely from his own ideas, to determine what kind of scene the universe must be, or to give the preference to one state or situation of things above another. for as nothing which he clearly conceives could be esteemed impossible or implying a contradiction, every chimera of his fancy would be upon an equal footing; nor could he assign any just reason why he adheres to one idea or system, and rejects the others which are equally possible.
if a man were to set aside everything he knows or has seen, he would be entirely unable to work out, merely from his own ideas, what the universe must be like, or to think one state of affairs to be more likely than another. nothing that he clearly conceives could be thought to be impossible or to imply a contradiction, so every fanciful story his imagination comes up with would be on an equal footing with every other; and he could give no valid reason for sticking to one idea or system and rejecting the others that are equally possible.

again; after he opens his eyes, and contemplates the world as it really is, it would be impossible for him at first to assign the cause of any one event, much less of the whole of things, or of the universe. he might set his fancy a rambling; and she might bring him in an infinite variety of reports and representations. these would all be possible; but being all equally possible, he would never of himself give a satisfactory account for his preferring one of them to the rest. experience alone can point out to him the true cause of any phenomenon.
next step in the argument: after he opens his eyes and sees the world as it really is, he can't at first tell what the cause was of any one event, much less of the totality of things or of the universe. he might start his imagination rambling, and it might bring in to him an infinite variety of reports and stories. these would all be possible, but because they would all be equally possible he could never from his own resources explain satisfactorily why he prefers one of them to the rest. experience alone can point out to him the true cause of anything that happens.

now, according to this method of reasoning, demea, it follows, (and is, indeed, tacitly allowed by cleanthes himself,) that order, arrangement, or the adjustment of final causes, is not of itself any proof of design; but only so far as it has been experienced to proceed from that principle. for aught we can know a priori, matter may contain the source or spring of order originally within itself, as well as mind does; and there is no more difficulty in conceiving, that the several elements, from an internal unknown cause, may fall into the most exquisite arrangement, than to conceive that their ideas, in the great universal mind, from a like internal unknown cause, fall into that arrangement. the equal possibility of both these suppositions is allowed. but, by experience, we find, (according to cleanthes), that there is a difference between them. throw several pieces of steel together, without shape or form; they will never arrange themselves so as to compose a watch. stone, and mortar, and wood, without an architect, never erect a house. but the ideas in a human mind, we see, by an unknown, inexplicable economy, arrange themselves so as to form the plan of a watch or house. experience, therefore, proves, that there is an original principle of order in mind, not in matter. from similar effects we infer similar causes. the adjustment of means to ends is alike in the universe, as in a machine of human contrivance. the causes, therefore, must be resembling.
now, demea, this method of reasoning leads to something that cleanthes himself has tacitly admitted, namely: order, arrangement, or the suitability of things for various purposes (like the suitability of legs for walking) is not of itself any proof that a designer has been at work, except in cases where experience has shown us that such order, arrangement, etc. is due to a designer. for all we can know a priori, matter may have a source of order within it, just as mind does, having it inherently, basically, not acquired from somewhere else. when a number of elements come together in an exquisite arrangement, *you may think it harder to conceive that they do this of their own accord than to conceive that some designer put them into that arrangement. but that is too quick and careless. think about what is involved in a designer's arranging them: it means that he creates the arrangement in his mind, assembling in the appropriate way the ideas of the elements in question. but, then, how does that happen? i put it to you*, it is no harder to conceive that the elements are caused to come together into this arrangement by some unknown cause that is internal to them, than it is to conceive that the ideas of these elements come together in that arrangement in the great universal mind, being caused to do so by a similarly unknown cause that is internal to that mind. these two suppositions are agreed to be equally possible; but according to cleanthes experience shows us a difference between them. throw several pieces of steel together, without shape or form: they will never arrange themselves so as to compose a watch. stone, and mortar, and wood, without an architect, never erect a house. but we see that the ideas in a human mind arrange themselves so as to form the plan of a watch or house, though we haven't the faintest notion of how they do this. so experience shows that minds and not matter have a built-in principle of order. from similar effects we infer similar causes. the way means are fitted to ends in the universe at large is like the way means are fitted to ends in a machine designed by a human being. the cause of the machine, therefore, must be similar to the cause of the universe.

i was from the beginning scandalised, i must own, with this resemblance, which is asserted, between the deity and human creatures; and must conceive it to imply such a degradation of the supreme being as no sound theist could endure. with your assistance, therefore, demea, i shall endeavour to defend what you justly call the adorable mysteriousness of the divine nature, and shall refute this reasoning of cleanthes, provided he allows that i have made a fair representation of it.
i was, i admit, shocked by this assertion of a resemblance between god and human creatures. i can't help seeing it as implying such a lowering of the supreme being that no right-thinking theist could put up with it. with your assistance, therefore, demea, i shall try to defend what you justly call the worshipful mysteriousness of god's nature, and shall refute this reasoning of cleanthes, provided he agrees that i have presented it fairly.

when cleanthes had assented, philo, after a short pause, proceeded in the following manner.
when cleanthes had agreed to this, philo, after a short pause, proceeded in the following manner.

that all inferences, cleanthes, concerning fact, are founded on experience; and that all experimental reasonings are founded on the supposition that similar causes prove similar effects, and similar effects similar causes; i shall not at present much dispute with you. but observe, i entreat you, with what extreme caution all just reasoners proceed in the transferring of experiments to similar cases. unless the cases be exactly similar, they repose no perfect confidence in applying their past observation to any particular phenomenon. every alteration of circumstances occasions a doubt concerning the event; and it requires new experiments to prove certainly, that the new circumstances are of no moment or importance. a change in bulk, situation, arrangement, age, disposition of the air, or surrounding bodies; any of these particulars may be attended with the most unexpected consequences: and unless the objects be quite familiar to us, it is the highest temerity to expect with assurance, after any of these changes, an event similar to that which before fell under our observation. the slow and deliberate steps of philosophers here, if any where, are distinguished from the precipitate march of the vulgar, who, hurried on by the smallest similitude, are incapable of all discernment or consideration.
in the meantime i shan't disagree much with your theses that all inferences concerning matters of fact are based on experience, and that all experimental reasoning is based on the supposition that similar causes prove similar effects, and similar effects prove similar causes. but please notice how extremely cautious good thinkers are in transferring a discovered result to a similar case. these thinkers are not perfectly confident in applying their past observation to some other particular phenomenon, unless the old and new cases are exactly similar. every alteration in the circumstances of the cause raises a doubt about the outcome; and it requires new experiments to prove for sure that the new circumstances have no causal significance. a change in size, position, arrangement, age, disposition of the air or of surrounding bodies any of these may bring with it the most unexpected consequences. unless the objects are quite familiar to us, it is much too bold to expect confidently that when a cause has been found to have a certain effect another cause, differing from the earlier one in one of these ways, will have the same effect. the slow and deliberate steps of scientists, here if anywhere, are in contrast with the precipitate march of common men who, hurried along by the smallest similarity, are incapable of pondering or making distinctions.

but can you think, cleanthes, that your usual phlegm and philosophy have been preserved in so wide a step as you have taken, when you compared to the universe houses, ships, furniture, machines, and, from their similarity in some circumstances, inferred a similarity in their causes? thought, design, intelligence, such as we discover in men and other animals, is no more than one of the springs and principles of the universe, as well as heat or cold, attraction or repulsion, and a hundred others, which fall under daily observation. it is an active cause, by which some particular parts of nature, we find, produce alterations on other parts. but can a conclusion, with any propriety, be transferred from parts to the whole? does not the great disproportion bar all comparison and inference? from observing the growth of a hair, can we learn any thing concerning the generation of a man? would the manner of a leaf's blowing, even though perfectly known, afford us any instruction concerning the vegetation of a tree?
which group, cleanthes, have you just shown yourself to belong to? you are usually cool and philosophical in these matters, but has your usual attitude been preserved in the stride you have taken in likening the universe to houses, ships, furniture, and machines, inferring from their similarity in some respects a similarity in their causes? thought, design, intelligence, such as we discover in men and other animals, is just one of the springs and forces of the universe, along with heat and cold, attraction and repulsion, and a hundred others that we observe daily. it is an active cause through which (we find) certain particular parts of nature produce alterations in other parts. but can it be proper to argue from parts to the whole? doesn't the great disproportion between part and whole bar all comparison and inference? from observing the growth of a hair, can we learn anything about how men come into being? would the way a leaf blows even if we knew this perfectly teach us anything about how a tree grows?

but, allowing that we were to take the operations of one part of nature upon another, for the foundation of our judgement concerning the origin of the whole, (which never can be admitted,) yet why select so minute, so weak, so bounded a principle, as the reason and design of animals is found to be upon this planet? what peculiar privilege has this little agitation of the brain which we call thought, that we must thus make it the model of the whole universe? our partiality in our own favour does indeed present it on all occasions; but sound philosophy ought carefully to guard against so natural an illusion.
anyway, even if we do take the operations of one part of nature on another as our basis for a judgment about the origin of the whole (which is something we should never do), why would we select as our basis such a tiny, weak, limited cause as the reason and design of animals on this planet seems to be? this little agitation of the brain that we call thought what special privilege does it have that entitles it to serve as the model of the whole universe? it looms large for us because we are always in the presence of it; but sound philosophy ought carefully to guard against this kind of natural illusion.

so far from admitting, continued philo, that the operations of a part can afford us any just conclusion concerning the origin of the whole, i will not allow any one part to form a rule for another part, if the latter be very remote from the former. is there any reasonable ground to conclude, that the inhabitants of other planets possess thought, intelligence, reason, or any thing similar to these faculties in men? when nature has so extremely diversified her manner of operation in this small globe, can we imagine that she incessantly copies herself throughout so immense a universe? and if thought, as we may well suppose, be confined merely to this narrow corner, and has even there so limited a sphere of action, with what propriety can we assign it for the original cause of all things? the narrow views of a peasant, who makes his domestic economy the rule for the government of kingdoms, is in comparison a pardonable sophism.
so far from admitting, continued philo, that the operations of a part entitle us to draw any conclusion about the origin of the whole, i won't even allow any one part to justify conclusions about another part, if the two are very unlike one another. is there any reasonable ground to conclude that the inhabitants of other planets have thought, intelligence, reason, or anything similar to these faculties that men have? when nature has operated in such a wide variety of ways on this small planet, can we think that she incessantly copies herself throughout the rest of this immense universe? also, it seems likely enough that thought occurs only in this narrow corner, and even here its sphere of action is very limited namely, to affecting the movements of the bodies of some animals. so what can justify taking thought to be the original cause of everything? such a jump is worse than that of a peasant whose idea of the government of kingdoms is based on how he runs his own household!

but were we ever so much assured, that a thought and reason, resembling the human, were to be found throughout the whole universe, and were its activity elsewhere vastly greater and more commanding than it appears in this globe; yet i cannot see, why the operations of a world constituted, arranged, adjusted, can with any propriety be extended to a world which is in its embryo state, and is advancing towards that constitution and arrangement. by observation, we know somewhat of the economy, action, and nourishment of a finished animal; but we must transfer with great caution that observation to the growth of a foetus in the womb, and still more to the formation of an animalcule in the loins of its male parent. nature, we find, even from our limited experience, possesses an infinite number of springs and principles, which incessantly discover themselves on every change of her position and situation. and what new and unknown principles would actuate her in so new and unknown a situation as that of the formation of a universe, we cannot, without the utmost temerity, pretend to determine.
but even if we were perfectly sure that thought and reason similar to ours is to be found throughout the whole universe, and even if its activity elsewhere in the universe is vastly greater in scope and more powerful than it appears to be on this planet, still i cannot see that the operations of a world that is fully constituted, arranged and adjusted can properly be extended to a world that is in its embryo state, and is still moving towards that finished constitution and arrangement. by observation we know a certain amount about how a finished animal moves, is nourished, stays alive; but we should be cautious about transferring that knowledge speculatively to the growth of a foetus in the womb, and still more to the formation of an animalcule in the testes of its male parent. even our limited experience shows us that nature has an infinite number of causes and principles which incessantly reveal themselves as circumstances change. it would be absurdly rash of us to claim to know what new and unknown principles would be at work in such a new and unknown situation as that of the formation of a universe.

a very small part of this great system, during a very short time, is very imperfectly discovered to us; and do we thence pronounce decisively concerning the origin of the whole?
a very small part of this great system of the universe, during a very short time, is very imperfectly revealed to us, do we then pronounce confidently about the origin of the whole?

admirable conclusion! stone, wood, brick, iron, brass, have not, at this time, in this minute globe of earth, an order or arrangement without human art and contrivance; therefore the universe could not originally attain its order and arrangement, without something similar to human art. but is a part of nature a rule for another part very wide of the former? is it a rule for the whole? is a very small part a rule for the universe? is nature in one situation, a certain rule for nature in another situation vastly different from the former?
admirable conclusion! at this time on this little planet stone, wood, brick, iron, brass are not ordered or arranged except through human artifice and contrivance; therefore the universe couldn't originally attain its order and arrangement without something similar to human artifice. but is one part of nature a rule for another part that is very different from it? is it a rule for the whole? is a very small part a rule for the universe? is nature in one situation a certain rule for nature in another situation vastly different from the former? is nature at work in our considerably developed universe a certain rule for nature at work in starting a universe?

and can you blame me, cleanthes, if i here imitate the prudent reserve of simonides, who, according to the noted story, being asked by hiero, what god was? desired a day to think of it, and then two days more; and after that manner continually prolonged the term, without ever bringing in his definition or description? could you even blame me, if i had answered at first, that i did not know, and was sensible that this subject lay vastly beyond the reach of my faculties? you might cry out sceptic and railler, as much as you pleased: but having found, in so many other subjects much more familiar, the imperfections and even contradictions of human reason, i never should expect any success from its feeble conjectures, in a subject so sublime, and so remote from the sphere of our observation. when two species of objects have always been observed to be conjoined together, i can infer, by custom, the existence of one wherever i see the existence of the other; and this i call an argument from experience. but how this argument can have place, where the objects, as in the present case, are single, individual, without parallel, or specific resemblance, may be difficult to explain. and will any man tell me with a serious countenance, that an orderly universe must arise from some thought and art like the human, because we have experience of it? to ascertain this reasoning, it were requisite that we had experience of the origin of worlds; and it is not sufficient, surely, that we have seen ships and cities arise from human art and contrivance...
and can you blame me, cleanthes, if i here imitate the wise caution of simonides? according to the famous story, hiero asked him what is god?, and simonides asked for a day to think about it, and then two days more; and in that way he continually prolonged his time for thinking about it, without ever producing a definition or description. could you even blame me if i answered straight off that i didn't know what god is, and was aware that this subject lies vastly beyond the reach of my faculties? you might cry sceptic! and tease! as much as you pleased; but having found the imperfections and even contradictions of human reason when it is exercised on so many other subjects that are much more familiar than this one, i would never expect any success from reason's feeble conjectures concerning a subject that is so elevated and so remote from the sphere of our observation. when two sorts of objects have always been observed to be conjoined together, custom leads me to infer the existence of an object of one sort wherever i see the existence of an object of the other sort; and i call this an argument from experience. but it is hard to see how this pattern of argument can be appropriate in our present case, where the objects we are considering don't fall into sorts, but are single, individual, without parallel or specific resemblance. and will anyone tell me with a straight face that an orderly universe must arise from some thought and artifice like human thought and artifice, because we have experience of it? to make this reasoning secure, we would need to have had experience of the origins of worlds; it isn't sufficient, surely, to have seen ships and cities arise from human artifice and contrivance.

philo was proceeding in this vehement manner, somewhat between jest and earnest, as it appeared to me, when he observed some signs of impatience in cleanthes, and then immediately stopped short. what i had to suggest, said cleanthes, is only that you would not abuse terms, or make use of popular expressions to subvert philosophical reasonings. you know, that the vulgar often distinguish reason from experience, even where the question relates only to matter of fact and existence; though it is found, where that reason is properly analysed, that it is nothing but a species of experience. to prove by experience the origin of the universe from mind, is not more contrary to common speech, than to prove the motion of the earth from the same principle. and a caviller might raise all the same objections to the copernican system, which you have urged against my reasonings. have you other earths, might he say, which you have seen to move? have...
philo was going on in this vigorous manner, somewhere between joking and seriousness (it seemed to me), when he noticed signs of impatience in cleanthes, and immediately stopped. what i wanted to cut in with, said cleanthes, is only the suggestion that you stop abusing terms, using common everyday expressions to subvert philosophical reasonings. you know that common people often distinguish reason from experience, even where the question relates only to a matter of fact and existence; though it is found that where that kind of reason is properly analysed it turns out to be nothing but a sort of experience. to prove by experience that the universe was originated by a mind is no more contrary to common speech than to prove by experience that the earth moves. a fault-finder could raise against the copernican system all the objections that you have urged against my reasonings. have you other earths, he might say, which you have seen to move? have

yes! cried philo, interrupting him, we have other earths. is not the moon another earth, which we see to turn round its centre? is not venus another earth, where we observe the same phenomenon? are not the revolutions of the sun also a confirmation, from analogy, of the same theory? all the planets, are they not earths, which revolve about the sun? are not the satellites moons, which move round jupiter and saturn, and along with these primary planets round the sun? these analogies and resemblances, with others which i have not mentioned, are the sole proofs of the copernican system; and to you it belongs to consider, whether you have any analogies of the same kind to support your theory.
yes! interrupted philo, we do have other earths. isn't the moon another earth, which we see to turn round its centre? isn't venus another earth, where we see the same thing? aren't the revolutions of the sun also a confirmation through analogy of the same theory? aren't all the planets that revolve around the sun earths? aren't the satellites of jupiter and saturn moons that move around the sun along with their primary planets? these analogies and resemblances and others that i haven't mentioned are the only evidence for the copernican system. it is for you to consider whether you have any analogies of the same kind to support your theory.

in reality, cleanthes, continued he, the modern system of astronomy is now so much received by all inquirers, and has become so essential a part even of our earliest education, that we are not commonly very scrupulous in examining the reasons upon which it is founded. it is now become a matter of mere curiosity to study the first writers on that subject, who had the full force of prejudice to encounter, and were obliged to turn their arguments on every side in order to render them popular and convincing. but if we peruse galileo's famous dialogues concerning the system of the world, we shall find, that that great genius, one of the sublimest that ever existed, first bent all his endeavours to prove, that there was no foundation for the distinction commonly made between elementary and celestial substances. the schools, proceeding from the illusions of sense, had carried this distinction very far; and had established the latter substances to be ingenerable, incorruptible, unalterable, impassable; and had assigned all the opposite qualities to the former. but galileo, beginning with the moon, proved its similarity in every particular to the earth; its convex figure, its natural darkness when not illuminated, its density, its distinction into solid and liquid, the variations of its phases, the mutual illuminations of the earth and moon, their mutual eclipses, the inequalities of the lunar surface, &c. after many instances of this kind, with regard to all the planets, men plainly saw that these bodies became proper objects of experience; and that the similarity of their nature enabled us to extend the same arguments and phenomena from one to the other.
in reality, cleanthes, he went on, the modern system of astronomy is now so thoroughly accepted by all enquirers, and has become such an essential a part of the education even of small children, that we are often not very scrupulous about examining the reasons for it. it is now become a matter of mere scholarly curiosity to study the first writers on that subject the ones who had the full force of prejudice against them, and had to present their arguments in every possible light in order to render them popular and convincing. but if we peruse galileo's famous dialogues concerning the system of the world, we shall find that that great genius one of the greatest who ever existed first put all his efforts into proving that there is no basis for the distinction commonly made between elementary and celestial substances. the aristotelian scientists, relying on sensory illusions, had made a great deal of this distinction; they had laid it down that celestial substances cannot be generated, altered, or in any way affected, and they had assigned all the opposite qualities to elementary substances. but galileo, beginning with the moon, proved its similarity in every detail to the earth its convex shape, its natural darkness when not illuminated by the sun, its density, its distinction into solid and liquid, the variations of its phases, the mutual illuminations of the earth and moon, their mutual eclipses, the unevenness of the moon's surface, and so on. after many examples of this kind relating to all the planets, men saw that these bodies were proper objects of experience, and that their similarity to one another entitled us to extend the same arguments and phenomena from one to another.

in this cautious proceeding of the astronomers, you may read your own condemnation, cleanthes; or rather may see, that the subject in which you are engaged exceeds all human reason and inquiry. can you pretend to show any such similarity between the fabric of a house, and the generation of a universe? have you ever seen nature in any such situation as resembles the first arrangement of the elements? have worlds ever been formed under your eye; and have you had leisure to observe the whole progress of the phenomenon, from the first appearance of order to its final consummation? if you have, then cite your experience, and deliver your theory.
this cautious proceeding of the astronomers implicitly condemns your argument, cleanthes; or, rather, it points to the fact that the subject on which you are engaged exceeds all human reason and enquiry. can you claim to show any such similarity between the structure of a house and the generation of a universe? have you ever seen nature in a situation that resembles the first arrangement of the elements at the beginning of the universe? have worlds ever been formed under your eye; and have you had leisure to observe the whole progress of world-making, from the first appearance of order to its final consummation? if you have, then cite your experience, and deliver your theory.

part 3
part 3

how the most absurd argument, replied cleanthes, in the hands of a man of ingenuity and invention, may acquire an air of probability! are you not aware, philo, that it became necessary for copernicus and his first disciples to prove the similarity of the terrestrial and celestial matter; because several philosophers, blinded by old systems, and supported by some sensible appearances, had denied this similarity? but that it is by no means necessary, that theists should prove the similarity of the works of nature to those of art; because this similarity is self-evident and undeniable? the same matter, a like form; what more is requisite to show an analogy between their causes, and to ascertain the origin of all things from a divine purpose and intention? your objections, i must freely tell you, are no better than the abstruse cavils of those philosophers who denied motion; and ought to be refuted in the same manner, by illustrations, examples, and instances, rather than by serious argument and philosophy.
in the hands of an ingenious and inventive person, replied cleanthes, even the most absurd argument can be made to seem plausible! don't you realize, philo, that copernicus and his first disciples had to prove the similarity of terrestrial to celestial matter because various scientists blinded by old systems, and supported by some empirical evidence had denied that similarity? but that theists don't in the same way have to prove the similarity of the works of nature to those of human artifice, because this similarity is self-evident and undeniable? the works of nature are made of the same stuff as are human artifacts, and the two are alike in form also; what more is needed to show an analogy between their causes, and to show that the origin of all things is a divine purpose and intention? your objections, to put it bluntly, are no better than the elaborate arguments used by the philosophers who denied that anything moves; and they ought to be refuted in the same way as those, by illustrations, examples, and instances, rather than by serious argument and philosophy. that is how i shall oppose your arguments.

suppose, therefore, that an articulate voice were heard in the clouds, much louder and more melodious than any which human art could ever reach: suppose, that this voice were extended in the same instant over all nations, and spoke to each nation in its own language and dialect: suppose, that the words delivered not only contain a just sense and meaning, but convey some instruction altogether worthy of a benevolent being, superior to mankind: could you possibly hesitate a moment concerning the cause of this voice? and must you not instantly ascribe it to some design or purpose? yet i cannot see but all the same objections (if they merit that appellation) which lie against the system of theism, may also be produced against this inference.
suppose that an articulate voice were heard in the clouds, much louder and more melodious than any human voice could ever be; suppose further that this voice were heard at the same time in all nations, and that it spoke to each nation in its own language and dialect; suppose, finally, that the words spoken from the sky were not only meaningful but conveyed some instruction that was altogether worthy of a benevolent being who was superior to mankind. if all that occurred, could you possibly hesitate for a moment over the cause of this voice? wouldn't you be compelled to ascribe it, straight off, to some design or purpose? yet if you did come to that conclusion, your inference would be open to all the same objections (if they deserve such a label) that are brought against the system of theism.

might you not say, that all conclusions concerning fact were founded on experience: that when we hear an articulate voice in the dark, and thence infer a man, it is only the resemblance of the effects which leads us to conclude that there is a like resemblance in the cause: but that this extraordinary voice, by its loudness, extent, and flexibility to all languages, bears so little analogy to any human voice, that we have no reason to suppose any analogy in their causes: and consequently, that a rational, wise, coherent speech proceeded, you know not whence, from some accidental whistling of the winds, not from any divine reason or intelligence? you see clearly your own objections in these cavils, and i hope too you see clearly, that they cannot possibly have more force in the one case than in the other.
here's the position you seem to be committed to: all conclusions about matters of fact are based on experience: when we hear an articulate voice in the dark and infer that a man has spoken, it is only the resemblance of the effects which leads us to conclude that there is a similar resemblance in the causes. but this extraordinary voice from the sky is loud and wide-ranging and flexible as to languages, which no human voice is; so we have no reason to suppose its cause is like the cause of human speech. so this rational, wise, coherent speech came from we know not where perhaps an accidental whistling of the winds and not from any divine reason or intelligence. you can see clearly your own objections in these objections; and i hope you also see clearly that one lot is no better than the other.

but to bring the case still nearer the present one of the universe, i shall make two suppositions, which imply not any absurdity or impossibility. suppose that there is a natural, universal, invariable language, common to every individual of human race; and that books are natural productions, which perpetuate themselves in the same manner with animals and vegetables, by descent and propagation. several expressions of our passions contain a universal language: all brute animals have a natural speech, which, however limited, is very intelligible to their own species. and as there are infinitely fewer parts and less contrivance in the finest composition of eloquence, than in the coarsest organised body, the propagation of an iliad or aeneid is an easier supposition than that of any plant or animal.
but to bring the case still nearer our present topic of the universe, i shall make two suppositions, which though they are weird and not true don't involve any absurdity or impossibility. suppose that there is a natural, universal, invariable language, common to every individual of the human race; and that books are natural products which perpetuate themselves in the same way as animals and plants do, by descent and propagation. these suppositions aren't as wildly far from fact as you might think. we do have a kind of universal language, embedded in some expressions of our passions; and all the lower animals have a natural speech, which, however limited, is very intelligible to their own species. and as the finest and most eloquent text is infinitely less complex and intricate than the coarsest organism, the propagation of an iliad or aeneid is easier to suppose than that of any plant or animal.

suppose, therefore, that you enter into your library, thus peopled by natural volumes, containing the most refined reason and most exquisite beauty; could you possibly open one of them, and doubt, that its original cause bore the strongest analogy to mind and intelligence? when it reasons and discourses; when it expostulates, argues, and enforces its views and topics; when it applies sometimes to the pure intellect, sometimes to the affections; when it collects, disposes, and adorns every consideration suited to the subject; could you persist in asserting, that all this, at the bottom, had really no meaning; and that the first formation of this volume in the loins of its original parent proceeded not from thought and design? your obstinacy, i know, reaches not that degree of firmness: even your sceptical play and wantonness would be abashed at so glaring an absurdity.
well, now: suppose you enter your library, the shelves of which are full of natural volumes, containing the most refined reasoning and most exquisite beauty; could you possibly open one of them and doubt that its original cause bore the strongest analogy to mind and intelligence? when it reasons and discourses; when it expostulates, argues, and enforces its views and lines of thought; when it appeals sometimes to the pure intellect, sometimes to the feelings; when it takes up every consideration suited to the subject, decorates it and deals with it; could you still say that all this basically had no meaning, and that thought and planning had no role to play when this volume first came into being in the loins of its original parent? i know you aren't as obstinate as that; even your irresponsible scepticism would be ashamed to assert such a glaring absurdity.

but if there be any difference, philo, between this supposed case and the real one of the universe, it is all to the advantage of the latter. the anatomy of an animal affords many stronger instances of design than the perusal of livy or tacitus; and any objection which you start in the former case, by carrying me back to so unusual and extraordinary a scene as the first formation of worlds, the same objection has place on the supposition of our vegetating library. choose, then, your party, philo, without ambiguity or evasion; assert either that a rational volume is no proof of a rational cause, or admit of a similar cause to all the works of nature.
furthermore, philo, if there is any difference between my two suppositions case and the real state of affairs in the universe, it is the latter that suits my argument better. the anatomy of an animal presents many stronger instances of design than the reading of livy or tacitus does; and any objection which you start in the real world case, demanding that we attend to such an unusual and extraordinary scene as the first formation of worlds, holds equally in the two suppositions case with its vegetating library. so choose sides, philo, without ambiguity or evasion; either assert that a rational book needn't have a rational cause, or admit a similar cause for all the works of nature.

let me here observe too, continued cleanthes, that this religious argument, instead of being weakened by that scepticism so much affected by you, rather acquires force from it, and becomes more firm and undisputed. to exclude all argument or reasoning of every kind, is either affectation or madness. the declared profession of every reasonable sceptic is only to reject abstruse, remote, and refined arguments; to adhere to common sense and the plain instincts of nature; and to assent, wherever any reasons strike him with so full a force that he cannot, without the greatest violence, prevent it. now the arguments for natural religion are plainly of this kind; and nothing but the most perverse, obstinate metaphysics can reject them. consider, anatomise the eye; survey its structure and contrivance; and tell me, from your own feeling, if the idea of a contriver does not immediately flow in upon you with a force like that of sensation. the most obvious conclusion, surely, is in favour of design; and it requires time, reflection, and study, to summon up those frivolous, though abstruse objections, which can support infidelity. who can behold the male and female of each species, the correspondence of their parts and instincts, their passions, and whole course of life before and after generation, but must be sensible, that the propagation of the species is intended by nature? millions and millions of such instances present themselves through every part of the universe; and no language can convey a more intelligible irresistible meaning, than the curious adjustment of final causes. to what degree, therefore, of blind dogmatism must one have attained, to reject such natural and such convincing arguments?
let me add, cleanthes went on, that this religious argument, instead of being weakened by the scepticism that you keep parading, is actually strengthened by it, becoming more firm and undisputed. to reject all argument and reasoning is either affectation or madness. every reasonable sceptic rejects only argumentation that is abstruse, remote, and intricate; sticks to common sense and the plain instincts of nature; and assents to things the reasons for which strike him with so much force that it would take him an enormous effort not to assent. now the arguments for natural religion are plainly of this forceful, almost irresistible kind; and nothing but the most perverse and obstinate metaphysics can reject them. think about the anatomy of the eye, consider its structure and design, and then tell me doesn't the idea of a designer immediately come into your mind with a force like that of a sensation? the most obvious conclusion, surely, is in favour of a designer; and it requires time, reflection, and study to bring to mind objections which are frivolous although they are abstruse which can support atheism. who can see the male and female of each species, the fit between their bodies, their instincts, their passions, and their whole course of life before and after generation, without being aware that the propagation of the species is intended by nature? millions and millions of such instances present themselves through every part of the universe; and the intricate fit of things to their purposes conveys an intelligible and obvious meaning at least as well as does any language. what level of blind dogmatism would you have to reach to reject such natural and convincing arguments?

some beauties in writing we may meet with, which seem contrary to rules, and which gain the affections, and animate the imagination, in opposition to all the precepts of criticism, and to the authority of the established masters of art. and if the argument for theism be, as you pretend, contradictory to the principles of logic; its universal, its irresistible influence proves clearly, that there may be arguments of a like irregular nature. whatever cavils may be urged, an orderly world, as well as a coherent, articulate speech, will still be received as an incontestable proof of design and intention.
however you may carp at it, the argument that likens an orderly world to a coherent, articulate speech will still be accepted as an incontestable proof of design and intention in the causation of the world. if this argument for theism conflicts with the principles of logic, as you claim it does, its irresistible power over nearly everyone clearly shows that there may be arguments that are good although they break the rules. don't dismiss this as special pleading, for we do sometimes accept rule-breaking performances as good, even as excellent. we sometimes encounter beauties in writing that seem contrary to the rules, and yet gain our affections and enliven our imaginations in opposition to all the literary doctrines and to the authority of the established literary masters.

it sometimes happens, i own, that the religious arguments have not their due influence on an ignorant savage and barbarian; not because they are obscure and difficult, but because he never asks himself any question with regard to them. whence arises the curious structure of an animal? from the copulation of its parents. and these whence? from their parents? a few removes set the objects at such a distance, that to him they are lost in darkness and confusion; nor is he actuated by any curiosity to trace them further. but this is neither dogmatism nor scepticism, but stupidity: a state of mind very different from your sifting, inquisitive disposition, my ingenious friend. you can trace causes from effects: you can compare the most distant and remote objects: and your greatest errors proceed not from barrenness of thought and invention, but from too luxuriant a fertility, which suppresses your natural good sense, by a profusion of unnecessary scruples and objections.
it sometimes happens, i admit, that the religious arguments don't have the influence they should have on an ignorant savage and barbarian; not because they are obscure and difficult, but because the savage never asks himself any of the questions on which they depend. where does the intricate structure of an animal come from? from the copulation of its parents. and where do the parents come from? from their parents. repeat this a few times and the objects come to be at such a distance from the savage that he loses them in darkness and confusion; and he has no curiosity to trace them further. but this is neither dogmatism nor scepticism, but stupidity: a state of mind very different from your close-arguing, question-raising disposition, my ingenious friend! you can trace causes from effects; you can compare the most distant and remote objects; and your greatest errors proceed not from barrenness of thought and invention, but from too luxuriant a fertility, which suppresses your natural good sense by a profusion of unnecessary doubts and objections.

here i could observe, hermippus, that philo was a little embarrassed and confounded: but while he hesitated in delivering an answer, luckily for him, demea broke in upon the discourse, and saved his countenance.
here i could observe that philo was a little embarrassed and confused; but while he hesitated in giving an answer, demea broke in on the conversation luckily for philo!

your instance, cleanthes, said he, drawn from books and language, being familiar, has, i confess, so much more force on that account: but is there not some danger too in this very circumstance; and may it not render us presumptuous, by making us imagine we comprehend the deity, and have some adequate idea of his nature and attributes? when i read a volume, i enter into the mind and intention of the author: i become him, in a manner, for the instant; and have an immediate feeling and conception of those ideas which revolved in his imagination while employed in that composition. but so near an approach we never surely can make to the deity. his ways are not our ways. his attributes are perfect, but incomprehensible. and this volume of nature contains a great and inexplicable riddle, more than any intelligible discourse or reasoning.
your example involving books and language, he said to cleanthes, gets much of its force from being familiar; but isn't there some danger in this very familiarity? may it not lead us to get above ourselves, by making us imagine we comprehend god and have some adequate idea of his nature and attributes? when i read a book i enter into the mind and intention of the author: at that moment i become him, in a way, and have an immediate feeling and conception of the ideas that revolved in his imagination when he was writing. but we can never come as close as that to god. his ways are not our ways. his attributes are perfect, but incomprehensible. and his book of nature contains a great and inexplicable riddle, more than any intelligible discourse or reasoning.

the ancient platonists, you know, were the most religious and devout of all the pagan philosophers; yet many of them, particularly plotinus, expressly declare, that intellect or understanding is not to be ascribed to the deity; and that our most perfect worship of him consists, not in acts of veneration, reverence, gratitude, or love; but in a certain mysterious self-annihilation, or total extinction of all our faculties. these ideas are, perhaps, too far stretched; but still it must be acknowledged, that, by representing the deity as so intelligible and comprehensible, and so similar to a human mind, we are guilty of the grossest and most narrow partiality, and make ourselves the model of the whole universe.
the ancient platonists, you know, were the most religious and devout of all the pagan philosophers; yet many of them, particularly plotinus, expressly declare that intellect or understanding is not to be ascribed to god, and that our most perfect worship of him consists not in acts of veneration, reverence, gratitude, or love but rather in a certain mysterious self-annihilation, or total extinction of all our faculties. these ideas are perhaps too far stretched; but still there is a truth buried in them: it must be admitted that by representing god as so intelligible and comprehensible, and so similar to a human mind, we are guilty of the grossest and most narrow self-centredness, making ourselves the model of the whole universe.

all the sentiments of the human mind, gratitude, resentment, love, friendship, approbation, blame, pity, emulation, envy, have a plain reference to the state and situation of man, and are calculated for preserving the existence and promoting the activity of such a being in such circumstances. it seems, therefore, unreasonable to transfer such sentiments to a supreme existence, or to suppose him actuated by them; and the phenomena besides of the universe will not support us in such a theory. all our ideas, derived from the senses, are confessedly false and illusive; and cannot therefore be supposed to have place in a supreme intelligence: and as the ideas of internal sentiment, added to those of the external senses, compose the whole furniture of human understanding, we may conclude, that none of the materials of thought are in any respect similar in the human and in the divine intelligence. now, as to the manner of thinking; how can we make any comparison between them, or suppose them any wise resembling? our thought is fluctuating, uncertain, fleeting, successive, and compounded; and were we to remove these circumstances, we absolutely annihilate its essence, and it would in such a case be an abuse of terms to apply to it the name of thought or reason. at least if it appear more pious and respectful (as it really is) still to retain these terms, when we mention the supreme being, we ought to acknowledge, that their meaning, in that case, is totally incomprehensible; and that the infirmities of our nature do not permit us to reach any ideas which in the least correspond to the ineffable sublimity of the divine attributes.
all the sentiments of the human mind gratitude, resentment, love, friendship, approval, blame, pity, imitation, envy clearly involve the state and situation of man, and are calculated for preserving the existence and promoting the activity of beings like us in circumstances like ours. so it seems unreasonable to transfer such sentiments to a supreme being, or to suppose that he is moved by them; besides which, the phenomena of the universe won't support us in such a theory. all our ideas derived from the senses are confusedly false and deceptive, and so can't be supposed to have a place in a supreme intelligence; and the whole stock of the human understanding consists of those together with the ideas of the external senses, and we can't attribute the latter to god, who is in no way passive and so doesn't have senses as we do. we may conclude that none of the materials of thought in the human intelligence are in any respect like those of the divine intelligence. now, as to the manner of thinking: how can we make any comparison between them, or suppose them to be in any way alike? our thought is fluctuating, uncertain, fleeting, successive, and compounded; and these features of it belong to its essence, so that it would be an abuse of words to apply the name of thought or reason to anything that wasn't fluctuating, uncertain, etc. at least, if it seems more pious and respectful (as it really is) still to use these words when we speak of the supreme being, we should admit that their meaning as applied to him is totally incomprehensible, and that the weakness of our nature prevents us from having any ideas that correspond in the least to the ineffable sublimity of god's attributes.

part 4
part 4

it seems strange to me, said cleanthes, that you, demea, who are so sincere in the cause of religion, should still maintain the mysterious, incomprehensible nature of the deity, and should insist so strenuously that he has no manner of likeness or resemblance to human creatures. the deity, i can readily allow, possesses many powers and attributes of which we can have no comprehension: but if our ideas, so far as they go, be not just, and adequate, and correspondent to his real nature, i know not what there is in this subject worth insisting on. is the name, without any meaning, of such mighty importance? or how do you mystics, who maintain the absolute incomprehensibility of the deity, differ from sceptics or atheists, who assert, that the first cause of all is unknown and unintelligible? their temerity must be very great, if, after rejecting the production by a mind, i mean a mind resembling the human, (for i know of no other,) they pretend to assign, with certainty, any other specific intelligible cause: and their conscience must be very scrupulous indeed, if they refuse to call the universal unknown cause a god or deity; and to bestow on him as many sublime eulogies and unmeaning epithets as you shall please to require of them.
it seems strange to me, said cleanthes, that you, demea, who are so sincere in the cause of religion, should still maintain the mysterious, incomprehensible nature of god, and should insist so strenuously that he in no way resembles human creatures. i freely admit that god has many powers and attributes that we can't comprehend; but if our ideas of him are not, as far as they go, true and adequate and in conformity with his real nature, i don't know what remains that is worth discussing in this subject. is the name, without any meaning, of such vast importance? and how do you mystics, who maintain the absolute incomprehensibility of god, differ from sceptics or atheists who assert that the first cause of everything is unknown and unintelligible? they reject the view that the world was produced by a mind, by which i mean a mind like the human one (for i don't know of any other kind). they must be very bold if they then go on to claim to know what other specific intelligible cause produced the world; and if they don't make that claim, and admit that the cause is unknown to them, they must be very scrupulous indeed if they refuse to call the unknown cause of everything a god or deity, and to bestow on him as many high-flown praises and meaningless epithets as you may ask them to.

who could imagine, replied demea, that cleanthes, the calm philosophical cleanthes, would attempt to refute his antagonists by affixing a nickname to them; and, like the common bigots and inquisitors of the age, have recourse to invective and declamation, instead of reasoning? or does he not perceive, that these topics are easily retorted, and that anthropomorphite is an appellation as invidious, and implies as dangerous consequences, as the epithet of mystic, with which he has honoured us? in reality, cleanthes, consider what it is you assert when you represent the deity as similar to a human mind and understanding. what is the soul of man? a composition of various faculties, passions, sentiments, ideas; united, indeed, into one self or person, but still distinct from each other. when it reasons, the ideas, which are the parts of its discourse, arrange themselves in a certain form or order; which is not preserved entire for a moment, but immediately gives place to another arrangement. new opinions, new passions, new affections, new feelings arise, which continually diversify the mental scene, and produce in it the greatest variety and most rapid succession imaginable. how is this compatible with that perfect immutability and simplicity which all true theists ascribe to the deity? by the same act, say they, he sees past, present, and future: his love and hatred, his mercy and justice, are one individual operation: he is entire in every point of space; and complete in every instant of duration. no succession, no change, no acquisition, no diminution. what he is implies not in it any shadow of distinction or diversity. and what he is this moment he ever has been, and ever will be, without any new judgement, sentiment, or operation. he stands fixed in one simple, perfect state: nor can you ever say, with any propriety, that this act of his is different from that other; or that this judgement or idea has been lately formed, and will give place, by succession, to any different judgement or idea.
who could imagine, replied demea, that cleanthes the calm philosophical cleanthes would attempt to refute his antagonists by sticking a label on them (namely the label mystic) and, like the common bigots and inquisitors of our time, resort to invective and rhetoric instead of reasoning? doesn't he realize that his kind of attack can go either way, and that anthropomorphite is as damaging and threatening a label, bringing as much danger with it, as the epithet mystic with which he has honoured me? in reality, cleanthes, consider what you are saying when you represent god as similar to a human mind and understanding. what is the mind of man? it is made up of many different faculties, passions, sentiments and ideas; they are indeed united into one self or person, but they are still distinct from each other. when a man's mind reasons, the ideas that are the parts of its mental discourse arrange themselves in a certain form or order; and this is not preserved intact for a moment, but immediately makes way for a new arrangement of ideas. new opinions, new passions, new affections, new feelings arise, which continually diversify the mental scene, and produce in it the greatest variety and most rapid succession imaginable. how is this compatible with that perfect unchangingness and simplicity simplicity in the sense of not having parts which all true theists ascribe to god? according to them, he sees past, present, and future in a single act; his love and hatred, his mercy and justice, are one individual operation; he is entirely present at every point in space, and exists completely at every instant of time. god's nature doesn't involve the slightest hint of difference or variation: there is no sequence of events in him, he doesn't change, he doesn't gain or lose anything. what he is now is what he has always been, and always will be, without any change in what he thinks, feels, or does. he stands fixed in one simple, perfect state; and it can never be correct to say that this act of his is different from that, or that this judgment or idea is one that he had only recently, and that it will in time be followed by some other judgment or idea.

i can readily allow, said cleanthes, that those who maintain the perfect simplicity of the supreme being, to the extent in which you have explained it, are complete mystics, and chargeable with all the consequences which i have drawn from their opinion. they are, in a word, atheists, without knowing it. for though it be allowed, that the deity possesses attributes of which we have no comprehension, yet ought we never to ascribe to him any attributes which are absolutely incompatible with that intelligent nature essential to him. a mind, whose acts and sentiments and ideas are not distinct and successive; one, that is wholly simple, and totally immutable, is a mind which has no thought, no reason, no will, no sentiment, no love, no hatred; or, in a word, is no mind at all. it is an abuse of terms to give it that appellation; and we may as well speak of limited extension without figure, or of number without composition.
i can readily allow, said cleanthes, that those who maintain that god is perfectly simple in the sense you have given to this, and to the extent that you have just expressed, are complete mystics, and are guilty of all the consequences that i have derived from their opinion. they are, in a word, atheists without knowing it. for though we may grant that god has attributes that we cannot understand, still we ought never to ascribe to him any attributes that are absolutely incompatible with the thinking nature that is essential to him. a mind whose acts and feelings and ideas are not distinct and successive, a mind that is wholly simple and totally unchanging, is a mind that has no thought, no reason, no will, no sentiment, no love, no hatred. in short, it isn't a mind at all! it is an abuse of words to call it a mind, on a par with speaking of a region of space that has no shape, or of number that isn't composed of smaller numbers.

pray consider, said philo, whom you are at present inveighing against. you are honouring with the appellation of atheist all the sound, orthodox divines, almost, who have treated of this subject; and you will at last be, yourself, found, according to your reckoning, the only sound theist in the world. but if idolaters be atheists, as, i think, may justly be asserted, and christian theologians the same, what becomes of the argument, so much celebrated, derived from the universal consent of mankind?
think who your targets are! said philo. you confer the title atheist on almost all the sound, orthodox theologians who have treated this subject; and you will end up finding that by your criteria you are the only sound theist in the world. but if idolaters are atheists (as i think they can fairly be said to be), and if christian theologians are also atheists (as you have implied), what is left of the famous argument for theism from the universal consent of mankind?

but because i know you are not much swayed by names and authorities, i shall endeavour to show you, a little more distinctly, the inconveniences of that anthropomorphism, which you have embraced; and shall prove, that there is no ground to suppose a plan of the world to be formed in the divine mind, consisting of distinct ideas, differently arranged, in the same manner as an architect forms in his head the plan of a house which he intends to execute.
but i know that names and authorities don't carry much weight with you, so i'll try to show you a little more clearly the drawbacks of that anthropomorphism that you have embraced; and i shall prove that there is no basis for the view that a plan of the world was formed in god's mind, consisting of distinct ideas, differently arranged, in the way an architect forms in his head the plan of a house that he intends to build.

it is not easy, i own, to see what is gained by this supposition, whether we judge of the matter by reason or by experience. we are still obliged to mount higher, in order to find the cause of this cause, which you had assigned as satisfactory and conclusive.
it isn't easy to see what is gained by this supposition that god had such a plan, whether we steer by reason or by experience. you have offered this supposed plan as a satisfactory and conclusive cause of the world. but we cannot leave it at that, for we still have to raise the further question about the cause of this cause. looking for an answer, let us first consult reason, then experience.

if reason (i mean abstract reason, derived from inquiries a priori) be not alike mute with regard to all questions concerning cause and effect, this sentence at least it will venture to pronounce, that a mental world, or universe of ideas, requires a cause as much, as does a material world, or universe of objects; and, if similar in its arrangement, must require a similar cause. for what is there in this subject, which should occasion a different conclusion or inference? in an abstract view, they are entirely alike; and no difficulty attends the one supposition, which is not common to both of them.
if reason (i mean abstract reason, involving a priori thoughts) is not equally silent with regard to all questions concerning cause and effect, it will at least venture to say this much: a mental world (or universe of ideas) stands in as much need of a cause as does a material world (or universe of objects); and, if the mental world is similar in its arrangement to the material one, their causes must be similar. for there is nothing here to give rise to a different conclusion or inference regarding one world from what we can conclude regarding the other. looked at abstractly, they are entirely alike; and any problem concerning either of them is equally a problem for the other.

again, when we will needs force experience to pronounce some sentence, even on these subjects which lie beyond her sphere, neither can she perceive any material difference in this particular, between these two kinds of worlds; but finds them to be governed by similar principles, and to depend upon an equal variety of causes in their operations. we have specimens in miniature of both of them. our own mind resembles the one; a vegetable or animal body the other. let experience, therefore, judge from these samples. nothing seems more delicate, with regard to its causes, than thought; and as these causes never operate in two persons after the same manner, so we never find two persons who think exactly alike. nor indeed does the same person think exactly alike at any two different periods of time. a difference of age, of the disposition of his body, of weather, of food, of company, of books, of passions; any of these particulars, or others more minute, are sufficient to alter the curious machinery of thought, and communicate to it very different movements and operations. as far as we can judge, vegetables and animal bodies are not more delicate in their motions, nor depend upon a greater variety or more curious adjustment of springs and principles.
if we turn to experience, compelling it to say something on these subjects that lie beyond its sphere, it replies that it can't see any significant difference between these two kinds of worlds, so far as causation is concerned: it finds them to be governed by similar principles, and to depend on an equal variety of causes in their operations. we have specimens in miniature of both sorts of world: our mind resembles the one, a plant or animal the other. so let experience judge from these samples, which are within its sphere. nothing seems more intricate in its causes than thought is. because these causes never operate in the same way in two people, we never find two people who think exactly alike. indeed, one person doesn't think in exactly the same way at any two times. a difference of age, of the disposition of his body, of weather, of food, of company, of books, of passions any of these details, and others that are less conspicuous, are sufficient to alter the precise machinery of thought and cause very different movements and operations in it. as far as we can judge, plants and animal bodies are no more intricate in their motions, and don't depend on a greater variety or more precise adjustment of springs and forces.

how, therefore, shall we satisfy ourselves concerning the cause of that being whom you suppose the author of nature, or, according to your system of anthropomorphism, the ideal world, into which you trace the material? have we not the same reason to trace that ideal world into another ideal world, or new intelligent principle? but if we stop, and go no further; why go so far? why not stop at the material world? how can we satisfy ourselves without going on in infinitum? and, after all, what satisfaction is there in that infinite progression? let us remember the story of the indian philosopher and his elephant. it was never more applicable than to the present subject. if the material world rests upon a similar ideal world, this ideal world must rest upon some other; and so on, without end. it were better, therefore, never to look beyond the present material world. by supposing it to contain the principle of its order within itself, we really assert it to be god; and the sooner we arrive at that divine being, so much the better. when you go one step beyond the mundane system, you only excite an inquisitive humour which it is impossible ever to satisfy.
now, as well as the question concerning the cause of the being whom you suppose to be the author of nature, your system of anthropomorphism confronts us with another question, concerning the cause of the mental world that you see as causing the material world that is, the cause of god's plan. how can we satisfy ourselves about that? haven't we the same reason to see that mental world as caused by another mental world, or new force of thinking? but if we stop there, refusing to raise the question about the cause of god's plan, why do we go as far as god's plan? why not stop at the material world? how can we satisfy ourselves without going on to infinity? not that there is any satisfaction in the infinite sequence of causes of causes of. let us remember the story of the indian philosopher and his elephant: he thought that the earth needed something to hold it up, and supposed it rested on an elephant, which he then supposed rested on a tortoise. the story was never more applicable than it is to the present subject, switching from a spatial to a causal interpretation of rest on. if the material world rests causally on a mental world that is similar to it, this mental world must rest on some other; and so on without end. it would be better, therefore, never to look beyond the present material world. by supposing it to contain within itself the causes of its order, we are really taking it to be god; and the sooner we arrive at that divine being, the better. when you go one step beyond the system of the familiar world, you only stir people up into asking questions that can't possibly be answered.

to say, that the different ideas which compose the reason of the supreme being, fall into order of themselves, and by their own nature, is really to talk without any precise meaning. if it has a meaning, i would fain know, why it is not as good sense to say, that the parts of the material world fall into order of themselves and by their own nature. can the one opinion be intelligible, while the other is not so?
you may say the different ideas that make up god's plan fall into order of themselves, and by their own nature, but that has no precise meaning. if it has a meaning, i would like to know why it is not equally good sense to say the parts of the material world fall into order of themselves, and by their own nature. can one opinion be intelligible, when the other isn't?

we have, indeed, experience of ideas which fall into order of themselves, and without any known cause. but, i am sure, we have a much larger experience of matter which does the same; as, in all instances of generation and vegetation, where the accurate analysis of the cause exceeds all human comprehension. we have also experience of particular systems of thought and of matter which have no order; of the first in madness, of the second in corruption. why, then, should we think, that order is more essential to one than the other? and if it requires a cause in both, what do we gain by your system, in tracing the universe of objects into a similar universe of ideas? the first step which we make leads us on for ever. it were, therefore, wise in us to limit all our inquiries to the present world, without looking further. no satisfaction can ever be attained by these speculations, which so far exceed the narrow bounds of human understanding.
we do indeed have experience of ideas that fall into order of themselves, and without any known cause outside them. but i am sure we have much more experience of matter that does the same for example in every case of generation and vegetation, where it is beyond our capacities to work out what the causes are. we have also experience of particular systems of thought and of matter that have no order of thought in madness, of matter in the decay of dead organisms. so why should we think that order is more essential to one than to the other? and if order requires a cause in both, what advantage does your system give us when it takes the material universe of objects to be caused by a similar mental universe of ideas? our first step beyond the material world leads us on for ever. so it would be wise of us to limit all our enquiries to the present world, without looking beyond it. we can get no satisfaction from these speculations that so far exceed the narrow limits of human understanding.

it was usual with the peripatetics, you know, cleanthes, when the cause of any phenomenon was demanded, to have recourse to their faculties or occult qualities; and to say, for instance, that bread nourished by its nutritive faculty, and senna purged by its purgative. but it has been discovered, that this subterfuge was nothing but the disguise of ignorance; and that these philosophers, though less ingenuous, really said the same thing with the sceptics or the vulgar, who fairly confessed that they knew not the cause of these phenomena. in like manner, when it is asked, what cause produces order in the ideas of the supreme being; can any other reason be assigned by you, anthropomorphites, than that it is a rational faculty, and that such is the nature of the deity? but why a similar answer will not be equally satisfactory in accounting for the order of the world, without having recourse to any such intelligent creator as you insist on, may be difficult to determine. it is only to say, that such is the nature of material objects, and that they are all originally possessed of a faculty of order and proportion. these are only more learned and elaborate ways of confessing our ignorance; nor has the one hypothesis any real advantage above the other, except in its greater conformity to vulgar prejudices.
as you know, cleanthes, when the ancient aristotelians were asked about the cause of some phenomenon, they usually replied in terms of their concepts of faculty or occult quality. asked why bread nourishes, for instance, they would say that bread nourishes by its nutritive faculty, and that senna purges by its purgative faculty. but it has turned out that this device was merely a disguise for ignorance, and that those philosophers were really saying though less openly the same thing as the sceptics and the plain people say when they candidly admit that they don't know what causes these phenomena. well, now, when we ask what causes order in the ideas of god, can you anthropomorphites give any answer except that the cause is a rational faculty, and that such is the nature of god? if that is acceptable, then it is hard to see why it isn't equally acceptable to account for the world's order in a similar way appealing to faculties and natures that material things have without having recourse to any such thinking creator as you insist on. it is only to say that this is the nature of material objects, and that they all have an inherent faculty of order and proportion; which are merely more learned and elaborate ways of admitting ignorance. the comparable story about god's plan is no better than this one about the material world except in being closer to the prejudices of common people.

you have displayed this argument with great emphasis, replied cleanthes: you seem not sensible how easy it is to answer it. even in common life, if i assign a cause for any event, is it any objection, philo, that i cannot assign the cause of that cause, and answer every new question which may incessantly be started? and what philosophers could possibly submit to so rigid a rule? philosophers, who confess ultimate causes to be totally unknown; and are sensible, that the most refined principles into which they trace the phenomena, are still to them as inexplicable as these phenomena themselves are to the vulgar. the order and arrangement of nature, the curious adjustment of final causes, the plain use and intention of every part and organ; all these bespeak in the clearest language an intelligent cause or author. the heavens and the earth join in the same testimony: the whole chorus of nature raises one hymn to the praises of its creator. you alone, or almost alone, disturb this general harmony. you start abstruse doubts, cavils, and objections: you ask me, what is the cause of this cause? i know not; i care not; that concerns not me. i have found a deity; and here i stop my inquiry. let those go further, who are wiser or more enterprising.
you have presented this argument with great emphasis, replied cleanthes, apparently not realizing how easy it is to answer it. when in everyday life i assign a cause for some event, philo, is it any objection that i can't assign the cause of that cause, and answer every new question that may endlessly be raised? what philosophers could possibly submit to so rigid a rule? philosophers admit that ultimate causes are totally unknown; and they are aware that the most refined principles which they use to explain the phenomena are as inexplicable to them as the phenomena themselves are to the common people. so there can be no question of their agreeing that it's no use assigning a cause unless you also assign the cause of the cause. the order and arrangement of nature, the intricate adjustment of things to their purposes, the plain use and intended purpose of every part and organ of a plant or animal all these announce in the clearest language an intelligent cause or author. the heavens and the earth join in the same testimony: the whole chorus of nature raises one hymn to the praises of its creator. you alone, or almost alone, disturb this general harmony. you start abstruse doubts, complaints, and objections; you ask me, what is the cause of this cause? i don't know, and i don't care. i have found a god, and with that i stop my enquiry. let those who are wiser or more enterprising go further.

i pretend to be neither, replied philo: and for that very reason, i should never perhaps have attempted to go so far; especially when i am sensible, that i must at last be contented to sit down with the same answer, which, without further trouble, might have satisfied me from the beginning. if i am still to remain in utter ignorance of causes, and can absolutely give an explication of nothing, i shall never esteem it any advantage to shove off for a moment a difficulty, which, you acknowledge, must immediately, in its full force, recur upon me. naturalists indeed very justly explain particular effects by more general causes, though these general causes themselves should remain in the end totally inexplicable; but they never surely thought it satisfactory to explain a particular effect by a particular cause, which was no more to be accounted for than the effect itself. an ideal system, arranged of itself, without a precedent design, is not a whit more explicable than a material one, which attains its order in a like manner; nor is there any more difficulty in the latter supposition than in the former.
i don't claim to be wiser or more enterprising, replied philo: and for that very reason i might never have tried to go so far; especially when i'm aware that i must eventually settle for the same answer that i might saving myself all that trouble have settled for from the beginning. if i am still to remain in utter ignorance of causes, and can't give a full explanation of anything, i shall never think it is an advantage to shove off for a moment a difficulty which (you admit) must immediately come back to me with its full force. natural scientists indeed very properly explain particular effects by more general causes, even when these general causes themselves are in the end totally inexplicable; but surely they never think it satisfactory to explain a particular effect by a particular cause that is no more explicable than the effect itself. a system of ideas, arranged by itself without a prior design, is not a whit more explicable than a material system that attains its order in the same way; there is no more difficulty in the latter supposition than in the former.

part 5
part 5

but to show you still more inconveniences, continued philo, in your anthropomorphism, please to take a new survey of your principles. like effects prove like causes. this is the experimental argument; and this, you say too, is the sole theological argument. now, it is certain, that the liker the effects are which are seen, and the liker the causes which are inferred, the stronger is the argument. every departure on either side diminishes the probability, and renders the experiment less conclusive. you cannot doubt of the principle; neither ought you to reject its consequences.
but to show you still more inconveniences in your anthropomorphism, continued philo, please look again at your principles. like effects prove like causes. this is the basis for every empirical argument, and you say that it is also the only basis for the theological argument. now, it is certain that the more similar the observed effects, and the more similar the causes that are inferred, the stronger is the argument. every move away from similarity, between the effects or between the causes, lowers the probability and makes the empirical argument less conclusive. you can't doubt the principle; so you oughtn't to reject its consequences.

all the new discoveries in astronomy, which prove the immense grandeur and magnificence of the works of nature, are so many additional arguments for a deity, according to the true system of theism; but, according to your hypothesis of experimental theism, they become so many objections, by removing the effect still further from all resemblance to the effects of human art and contrivance. for, if lucretius, even following the old system of the world, could exclaim,
according to the true system of theism, all the new discoveries in astronomy, which prove the immense grandeur and magnificence of the works of nature, are further arguments for the existence of a god; according to your hypothesis of empirical theism they become objections, by moving the universe still further from all resemblance to the effects of human skill and contrivance. if the argument for genuine theism had force in earlier times, how much more force it must have now, when the bounds of nature are so infinitely enlarged and such a magnificent scene is opened to us? it is still more unreasonable to form our idea of the cause of such an unlimited effect on the basis of our experience of the causes of the narrow products of human design and invention.

if this argument, i say, had any force in former ages, how much greater must it have at present, when the bounds of nature are so infinitely enlarged, and such a magnificent scene is opened to us? it is still more unreasonable to form our idea of so unlimited a cause from our experience of the narrow productions of human design and invention. the discoveries by microscopes, as they open a new universe in miniature, are still objections, according to you, arguments, according to me. the further we push our researches of this kind, we are still led to infer the universal cause of all to be vastly different from mankind, or from any object of human experience and observation.
the discoveries by microscopes, as they open a new universe in miniature, are arguments for theism according to me, whereas to you they are objections to it. the further we push our researches of this kind, the more we are led to infer that the universal cause of it all is vastly different from mankind, and from anything of which we have empirical knowledge.

and what say you to the discoveries in anatomy, chemistry, botany?... these surely are no objections, replied cleanthes; they only discover new instances of art and contrivance. it is still the image of mind reflected on us from innumerable objects. add, a mind like the human, said philo. i know of no other, replied cleanthes. and the liker the better, insisted philo. to be sure, said cleanthes.
and what do you have to say about the discoveries in anatomy, chemistry, botany? those surely are not objections, interrupted cleanthes; they only reveal new instances of skill and contrivance. it is still the image of mind reflected on us from innumerable objects. add, a mind like the human, said philo. that's the only kind i know, replied cleanthes. and the more like the better, insisted philo. to be sure, said cleanthes.

now, cleanthes, said philo, with an air of alacrity and triumph, mark the consequences. first, by this method of reasoning, you renounce all claim to infinity in any of the attributes of the deity. for, as the cause ought only to be proportioned to the effect, and the effect, so far as it falls under our cognisance, is not infinite; what pretensions have we, upon your suppositions, to ascribe that attribute to the divine being? you will still insist, that, by removing him so much from all similarity to human creatures, we give in to the most arbitrary hypothesis, and at the same time weaken all proofs of his existence.
now, cleanthes, said philo, pouncing with an air of triumph, note the consequences! first, by this method of reasoning, you give up all claim to infinity in any of the attributes of god. for, as the cause ought to be proportioned to the effect, and the effect so far as we know is not infinite, what right have we (on your theory) to ascribe infinity to god? you will still have to say that when we remove him so far from similarity to human creatures, we give in to the most arbitrary hypothesis and at the same time weaken all proofs of his existence.

secondly, you have no reason, on your theory, for ascribing perfection to the deity, even in his finite capacity, or for supposing him free from every error, mistake, or incoherence, in his undertakings. there are many inexplicable difficulties in the works of nature, which, if we allow a perfect author to be proved a priori, are easily solved, and become only seeming difficulties, from the narrow capacity of man, who cannot trace infinite relations. but according to your method of reasoning, these difficulties become all real; and perhaps will be insisted on, as new instances of likeness to human art and contrivance. at least, you must acknowledge, that it is impossible for us to tell, from our limited views, whether this system contains any great faults, or deserves any considerable praise, if compared to other possible, and even real systems. could a peasant, if the aeneid were read to him, pronounce that poem to be absolutely faultless, or even assign to it its proper rank among the productions of human wit, he, who had never seen any other production?
secondly, your theory gives you no reason to ascribe perfection to god even in his capacity as a finite being, or to suppose him to be free from every error, mistake, or incoherence in his activities. consider the many inexplicable difficulties in the works of nature illnesses, earthquakes, floods, volcanoes, and so on. if we think we can prove a priori that the world has a perfect creator, all these calamities become unproblematic: we can say that they only seem to us to be difficulties because we with our limited intellects can't follow all the infinitely complex details of which they are a part. but according to your line of argument these difficulties are real; indeed they might be emphasized as new instances of the world's likeness to the products of human skill and contrivance! you must, at least, admit that we with our limited knowledge can't possibly tell whether this system contains any great faults, or deserves any considerable praise, when compared to other possible systems and perhaps even when compared to real ones. if the aeneid were read to a peasant, could he judge it to absolutely faultless? could he even give it proper place in a ranking of the products of human intelligence he who had never seen any of the others?

but were this world ever so perfect a production, it must still remain uncertain, whether all the excellences of the work can justly be ascribed to the workman. if we survey a ship, what an exalted idea must we form of the ingenuity of the carpenter who framed so complicated, useful, and beautiful a machine? and what surprise must we feel, when we find him a stupid mechanic, who imitated others, and copied an art, which, through a long succession of ages, after multiplied trials, mistakes, corrections, deliberations, and controversies, had been gradually improving? many worlds might have been botched and bungled, throughout an eternity, ere this system was struck out; much labour lost, many fruitless trials made; and a slow, but continued improvement carried on during infinite ages in the art of world-making. in such subjects, who can determine, where the truth; nay, who can conjecture where the probability lies, amidst a great number of hypotheses which may be proposed, and a still greater which may be imagined?
even if this world were a perfect product, we still couldn't be sure whether all the excellences of the work could justly be ascribed to the workman. when we survey a ship, we may get an exalted idea of the ingenuity of the carpenter who built such a complicated, useful, and beautiful machine. but then we shall be surprised to find that the carpenter is a stupid tradesman who imitated others, and followed a trade which has gradually improved down the centuries, after multiplied trials, mistakes, corrections, deliberations, and controversies. perhaps our world is like that ship. it may be that many worlds were botched and bungled, throughout an eternity, before our present system was built; much labour lost, many useless trials made, and a slow but continued improvement carried on during infinite ages in the world-making trade. in such subjects as this, who can determine what is true who indeed can even guess what is probable when so many hypotheses can be put forward, and even more can be imagined?

and what shadow of an argument, continued philo, can you produce, from your hypothesis, to prove the unity of the deity? a great number of men join in building a house or ship, in rearing a city, in framing a commonwealth; why may not several deities combine in contriving and framing a world? this is only so much greater similarity to human affairs. by sharing the work among several, we may so much further limit the attributes of each, and get rid of that extensive power and knowledge, which must be supposed in one deity, and which, according to you, can only serve to weaken the proof of his existence. and if such foolish, such vicious creatures as man, can yet often unite in framing and executing one plan, how much more those deities or demons, whom we may suppose several degrees more perfect!
and what shadow of an argument, continued philo, can you produce, from your hypothesis, to prove that god is one being? a great many men join together to build a house or ship, to found and develop a city, to create a commonwealth; why couldn't several gods combine in designing and making a world? this would only serve to make divine activities more like human ones. by sharing the work among several gods we can reduce still further the attributes of each one of them; we can get rid of the extensive power and knowledge that we have to suppose the one god to possess (if there is only one) the extent of power and knowledge which, according to you, serves merely to weaken the argument for god's existence. and if such foolish, vicious creatures as men can often unite in forming and carrying out one plan, think how much more could be done by those gods or semi-gods whom we may suppose to be quite a lot more perfect than we are!

to multiply causes without necessity, is indeed contrary to true philosophy: but this principle applies not to the present case. were one deity antecedently proved by your theory, who were possessed of every attribute requisite to the production of the universe; it would be needless, i own, (though not absurd,) to suppose any other deity existent. but while it is still a question, whether all these attributes are united in one subject, or dispersed among several independent beings, by what phenomena in nature can we pretend to decide the controversy? where we see a body raised in a scale, we are sure that there is in the opposite scale, however concealed from sight, some counterpoising weight equal to it; but it is still allowed to doubt, whether that weight be an aggregate of several distinct bodies, or one uniform united mass. and if the weight requisite very much exceeds any thing which we have ever seen conjoined in any single body, the former supposition becomes still more probable and natural. an intelligent being of such vast power and capacity as is necessary to produce the universe, or, to speak in the language of ancient philosophy, so prodigious an animal exceeds all analogy, and even comprehension.
to multiply causes without necessity is indeed contrary to true philosophy; but that principle doesn't apply to our present case. if your theory had already established that there is one god who had every attribute needed for the production of the universe, then, i admit, it would be needless (though not absurd) to suppose that any other god existed. but while we are still confronting the question: are all these attributes united in one thing that has them all, or are they shared out among several independent beings? what phenomena in nature can we point to as supplying the answer? when we see a body raised in a scale, we are sure that in the opposite scale even if we can't see it there is some counterbalancing weight equal to it; but we can still question whether that weight is a heap of many distinct bodies, or rather one uniform united mass; for example, whether it is a handful of pebbles or a single lump of lead. and if the weight needed for the counterbalancing is very much greater than we have ever seen any single body to possess, the former supposition becomes still more probable and natural than the latter. as with weights, so with creators. an intelligent being of such vast power and ability as is necessary to produce the universe or, to speak in the language of ancient philosophy, so prodigious an animal goes beyond any analogy with ourselves, and indeed goes beyond what we can understand.

but further, cleanthes: men are mortal, and renew their species by generation; and this is common to all living creatures. the two great sexes of male and female, says milton, animate the world. why must this circumstance, so universal, so essential, be excluded from those numerous and limited deities? behold, then, the theogony of ancient times brought back upon us.
furthermore, cleanthes: men are mortal, and renew their species by generation, and so do all living creatures. the two great sexes of male and female, says milton, animate the world. why shouldn't this universal and essential feature of our condition also apply to those numerous and limited gods that i am saying you should argue for? and that brings us back to the ancient tales about the birth of the gods.

and why not become a perfect anthropomorphite? why not assert the deity or deities to be corporeal, and to have eyes, a nose, mouth, ears, &c.? epicurus maintained, that no man had ever seen reason but in a human figure; therefore the gods must have a human figure. and this argument, which is deservedly so much ridiculed by cicero, becomes, according to you, solid and philosophical.
indeed, why not become a perfect anthropomorphite? why not assert that god is or that each god is corporeal, having eyes, a nose, mouth, ears, etc.? epicurus maintained that no man has ever seen reason except in someone of human shape, and that therefore the gods must have that shape. this inference was deservedly ridiculed by cicero, but by your standards it is solid and philosophical.

in a word, cleanthes, a man who follows your hypothesis is able perhaps to assert, or conjecture, that the universe, sometime, arose from something like design: but beyond that position he cannot ascertain one single circumstance; and is left afterwards to fix every point of his theology by the utmost license of fancy and hypothesis. this world, for aught he knows, is very faulty and imperfect, compared to a superior standard; and was only the first rude essay of some infant deity, who afterwards abandoned it, ashamed of his lame performance: it is the work only of some dependent, inferior deity; and is the object of derision to his superiors: it is the production of old age and dotage in some superannuated deity; and ever since his death, has run on at adventures, from the first impulse and active force which it received from him. you justly give signs of horror, demea, at these strange suppositions; but these, and a thousand more of the same kind, are cleanthes's suppositions, not mine. from the moment the attributes of the deity are supposed finite, all these have place. and i cannot, for my part, think that so wild and unsettled a system of theology is, in any respect, preferable to none at all.
in a word, cleanthes, someone who follows your hypothesis can perhaps assert or conjecture that the universe at some time arose from something like design. but beyond that he can't make a case for any further details, and is left to fill in his theology by wildly imagining or guessing the rest. for all he knows, the world is very faulty and imperfect by certain higher standards, which opens the doors to all sorts of theologies, no one of which he can refute. here are just three of them. this world was only the first rough attempt of some infant god, who afterwards abandoned it, ashamed of his poor performance; it is the work of some dependent, inferior god, whose superiors hold it up for ridicule; it was produced by some god in his old age and near-senility, and ever since his death the world has continued without further guidance, activated by the first shove he gave to it and the active force that he built into it. you rightly give signs of horror, demea, at these strange suppositions; but these and a thousand more like them are cleanthes suppositions, not mine. as soon as the attributes of god are supposed to be finite, all these suppositions get a foot-hold. speaking for myself, i can't see that having such a wild and unsettled a system of theology is in any way preferable to having none at all that is, being an atheist.

these suppositions i absolutely disown, cried cleanthes: they strike me, however, with no horror, especially when proposed in that rambling way in which they drop from you. on the contrary, they give me pleasure, when i see, that, by the utmost indulgence of your imagination, you never get rid of the hypothesis of design in the universe, but are obliged at every turn to have recourse to it. to this concession i adhere steadily; and this i regard as a sufficient foundation for religion.
i absolutely disown these suppositions! exclaimed cleanthes; but they don't fill me with horror, especially when put forward in the casual way in which you throw them off. on the contrary, they give me pleasure when i see that even when giving your imagination completely free rein, you don't get rid of the hypothesis of design in the universe, but are obliged to rely on it at every turn. that concession is what i stick to, and i regard it as a sufficient foundation for religion.

part 6
part 6

it must be a slight fabric, indeed, said demea, which can be erected on so tottering a foundation. while we are uncertain whether there is one deity or many; whether the deity or deities, to whom we owe our existence, be perfect or imperfect, subordinate or supreme, dead or alive, what trust or confidence can we repose in them? what devotion or worship address to them? what veneration or obedience pay them? to all the purposes of life the theory of religion becomes altogether useless: and even with regard to speculative consequences, its uncertainty, according to you, must render it totally precarious and unsatisfactory.
it must be a flimsy building, said demea, that can be erected on such a shaky foundation! while we are uncertain whether there is one god or many, whether god or the gods to whom we owe our existence are perfect or imperfect, subordinate or supreme, dead or alive, what trust or confidence can we put in them? what devotion or worship can we offer them? what veneration or obedience give to them? this theory of religion becomes altogether useless for all the practical purposes of life, and even when it is considered merely as a speculative theological theory, the uncertainty you attribute to it must render it totally precarious and unsatisfactory,

to render it still more unsatisfactory, said philo, there occurs to me another hypothesis, which must acquire an air of probability from the method of reasoning so much insisted on by cleanthes. that like effects arise from like causes: this principle he supposes the foundation of all religion. but there is another principle of the same kind, no less certain, and derived from the same source of experience; that where several known circumstances are observed to be similar, the unknown will also be found similar. thus, if we see the limbs of a human body, we conclude that it is also attended with a human head, though hid from us. thus, if we see, through a chink in a wall, a small part of the sun, we conclude, that, were the wall removed, we should see the whole body. in short, this method of reasoning is so obvious and familiar, that no scruple can ever be made with regard to its solidity.
to make it still more unsatisfactory, said philo, i've thought of another hypothesis that must seem probable when evaluated in terms of the method of reasoning that cleanthes insists on so much. he takes the basis for all religion to be this: similar effects arise from similar causes. but there is another principle of the same kind, equally certain and supported in the same way by experience. namely: where several known circumstances are observed to be similar, the unknown will also be found similar. example: if we see the limbs of a human body, we conclude that it is accompanied by a human head, even if we can't see it. second example: if we see a small part of the sun through a crack in a wall, we conclude that if the wall were removed we would see the whole sun, in short, this type of inference is so obvious and familiar that there can be no doubts as to its soundness.

now, if we survey the universe, so far as it falls under our knowledge, it bears a great resemblance to an animal or organised body, and seems actuated with a like principle of life and motion. a continual circulation of matter in it produces no disorder: a continual waste in every part is incessantly repaired: the closest sympathy is perceived throughout the entire system: and each part or member, in performing its proper offices, operates both to its own preservation and to that of the whole. the world, therefore, i infer, is an animal; and the deity is the soul of the world, actuating it, and actuated by it.
now, if we survey the universe far as we know it, it bears a great resemblance to an animal or organic body, and seems to be driven by a source of life and motion like the one that drives organisms. a continual circulation of matter in it produces no disorder; a continual waste in every part is incessantly repaired; the different parts of the whole system are seen to act in harmony with one another; and each part of the world or member of an organism, in doing its proper job, operates both for its own preservation and for that of the whole. from all this i infer the the world is an animal, and that god is the mind of the world, driving it and being affected by it.

you have too much learning, cleanthes, to be at all surprised at this opinion, which, you know, was maintained by almost all the theists of antiquity, and chiefly prevails in their discourses and reasonings. for though, sometimes, the ancient philosophers reason from final causes, as if they thought the world the workmanship of god; yet it appears rather their favourite notion to consider it as his body, whose organisation renders it subservient to him. and it must be confessed, that, as the universe resembles more a human body than it does the works of human art and contrivance, if our limited analogy could ever, with any propriety, be extended to the whole of nature, the inference seems juster in favour of the ancient than the modern theory.
you have too much learning, cleanthes, to be at all surprised by this opinion, which as you know was maintained by almost all the theists of antiquity, and is the main theology that one finds in their discourses and reasonings. for though the ancient philosophers sometimes reason from final causes, pointing to evidence of purpose in the world, as if they thought the world to be something god made, yet their favourite idea seems to have been that the world is god's body, which is organized in such a way that it obeys his commands (just as your body is so organized that for example when you decide to raise your arm it rises). the universe is more like a human body than like the works of human skill and planning; so if it is ever appropriate to liken the whole of nature to any facts about us, with all our limits, it seems that the ancient analogy between the universe and our body is sounder than the modern one between the universe and the things we make.

there are many other advantages, too, in the former theory, which recommended it to the ancient theologians. nothing more repugnant to all their notions, because nothing more repugnant to common experience, than mind without body; a mere spiritual substance, which fell not under their senses nor comprehension, and of which they had not observed one single instance throughout all nature. mind and body they knew, because they felt both: an order, arrangement, organisation, or internal machinery, in both, they likewise knew, after the same manner: and it could not but seem reasonable to transfer this experience to the universe; and to suppose the divine mind and body to be also coeval, and to have, both of them, order and arrangement naturally inherent in them, and inseparable from them.
the former theory also has many other advantages that recommended it to the ancient theologians. here is one important one. nothing clashed more with all their notions, because nothing clashes more with common experience, than mind without body the idea of a purely mental substance, which they didn't understand and of which they hadn't observed a single instance throughout all of nature. they knew mind and body because they felt both; they also knew an order, arrangement, organization, or internal machinery in both mind and body, again because they felt both; so it was bound to seem reasonable to transfer this experience of themselves to the universe. that is to suppose that neither the divine mind nor the divine body came first, and that each of them has an order and arrangement that is naturally inherent in it and inseparable from it.

here, therefore, is a new species of anthropomorphism, cleanthes, on which you may deliberate; and a theory which seems not liable to any considerable difficulties. you are too much superior, surely, to systematical prejudices, to find any more difficulty in supposing an animal body to be, originally, of itself, or from unknown causes, possessed of order and organisation, than in supposing a similar order to belong to mind. but the vulgar prejudice, that body and mind ought always to accompany each other, ought not, one should think, to be entirely neglected; since it is founded on vulgar experience, the only guide which you profess to follow in all these theological inquiries. and if you assert, that our limited experience is an unequal standard, by which to judge of the unlimited extent of nature; you entirely abandon your own hypothesis, and must thenceforward adopt our mysticism, as you call it, and admit of the absolute incomprehensibility of the divine nature.
so here is a new sort of anthropomorphism, cleanthes, for you to think about; and it's a theory that doesn't seem to be open to any great difficulties. i'm sure you are above such theoretical prejudices as to find any more difficulty in supposing an animal body to be ordered and organized originally, of itself, or from unknown causes than in supposing a mind to be ordered in that way. so you might think that likening the universe to an animal body doesn't require supposing that is driven by a mind, a divine mind. but the common prejudice that body and mind ought always to accompany each other ought not to be entirely neglected, for it is based on common experience, which is the only guide you claim to follow in all these theological enquiries. if you say that our limited experience is an inadequate standard by which to form opinions about the unlimited extent of nature, then you will be entirely abandoning your own hypothesis, and will have to adopt our mysticism (as you call it), and admit that god's nature is absolutely incomprehensible.

this theory, i own, replied cleanthes, has never before occurred to me, though a pretty natural one; and i cannot readily, upon so short an examination and reflection, deliver any opinion with regard to it. you are very scrupulous, indeed, said philo: were i to examine any system of yours, i should not have acted with half that caution and reserve, in starting objections and difficulties to it. however, if any thing occur to you, you will oblige us by proposing it.
i admit, replied cleanthes, that this theory had never before occurred to me, though it is a pretty natural one. i can't give an opinion about it until i have had more time to think it over. you are very scrupulous indeed, said philo more scrupulous than i am: if you had presented me with a system of yours, i wouldn't have been half as cautious and reserved in starting objections and difficulties to it. however, if anything does occur to you, please tell us.

why then, replied cleanthes, it seems to me, that, though the world does, in many circumstances, resemble an animal body; yet is the analogy also defective in many circumstances the most material: no organs of sense; no seat of thought or reason; no one precise origin of motion and action. in short, it seems to bear a stronger resemblance to a vegetable than to an animal, and your inference would be so far inconclusive in favour of the soul of the world.
why then, replied cleanthes, it seems to me that though the world does in many ways resemble an animal body, this analogy is also defective in many important respects: no organs of sense; no seat of thought or reason; no one precise origin of motion and action. in short, it seems to be more like a plant than an animal, and that weakens your inference to the mind of the world.

but, in the next place, your theory seems to imply the eternity of the world; and that is a principle, which, i think, can be refuted by the strongest reasons and probabilities. i shall suggest an argument to this purpose, which, i believe, has not been insisted on by any writer. those, who reason from the late origin of arts and sciences, though their inference wants not force, may perhaps be refuted by considerations derived from the nature of human society, which is in continual revolution, between ignorance and knowledge, liberty and slavery, riches and poverty; so that it is impossible for us, from our limited experience, to foretell with assurance what events may or may not be expected. ancient learning and history seem to have been in great danger of entirely perishing after the inundation of the barbarous nations; and had these convulsions continued a little longer, or been a little more violent, we should not probably have now known what passed in the world a few centuries before us. nay, were it not for the superstition of the popes, who preserved a little jargon of latin, in order to support the appearance of an ancient and universal church, that tongue must have been utterly lost; in which case, the western world, being totally barbarous, would not have been in a fit disposition for receiving the greek language and learning, which was conveyed to them after the sacking of constantinople. when learning and books had been extinguished, even the mechanical arts would have fallen considerably to decay; and it is easily imagined, that fable or tradition might ascribe to them a much later origin than the true one. this vulgar argument, therefore, against the eternity of the world, seems a little precarious.
secondly, your theory seems to imply the eternity of the world; and that thesis, i believe, can be refuted by the strongest reasons and probabilities. i shall suggest an argument against it one that i think hasn't been insisted on by any writer. first, though, we should look at a different and less strong argument for the world's having had a beginning. it is argued that the arts and sciences came into existence only recently, and so the world's past is fairly short. this inference has some force, but perhaps it can be refuted or, rather, its premise can be undercut by a point concerning the nature of human society. we continually revolve between ignorance and knowledge, between liberty and slavery, between riches and poverty; so our limited experience doesn't enable us to foretell with confidence what outcomes may or may not be expected. ancient learning and history seem to have been in great danger of entirely perishing after the influx of the barbarous nations into the roman empire; and if these convulsions had continued a little longer, or been a little more violent, we would probably not have known now what happened in the world a few centuries ago. indeed, the latin language would have been utterly lost if it weren't for the superstition of the popes, who preserved a little latin jargon so as to keep their church looking ancient and universal. with latin lost, the western world would have been totally barbarous, and so wouldn't have been in a fit state to receive the greek language and learning that came to them after the sacking of constantinople. when learning and books had been extinguished, even the practical arts, skills, and trades would have fallen into considerable decay; and it is easy to imagine that in that case fable or tradition might ascribe to those arts a much later origin than they actually had. and so, by parity of argument, we are not entitled to confidence that we aren't doing the same thing, because the records of vastly earlier arts and sciences have been wiped out. this common argument against the eternity of the world, therefore, seems a little precarious.

but here appears to be the foundation of a better argument. lucullus was the first that brought cherry-trees from asia to europe; though that tree thrives so well in many european climates, that it grows in the woods without any culture. is it possible, that throughout a whole eternity, no european had ever passed into asia, and thought of transplanting so delicious a fruit into his own country? or if the tree was once transplanted and propagated, how could it ever afterwards perish? empires may rise and fall, liberty and slavery succeed alternately, ignorance and knowledge give place to each other; but the cherry-tree will still remain in the woods of greece, spain, and italy, and will never be affected by the revolutions of human society.
but here is what seems to be the basis for a better argument. lucullus was the first person who brought cherry-trees from asia to europe; yet that tree thrives so well in many european climates that it grows in the woods without being cultivated. is it possible that throughout a whole eternity no european ever visited asia and thought of transplanting such a delicious fruit into his own country? if it was once transplanted and propagated before the time of lucullus, how could it ever afterwards perish? empires may rise and fall, liberty and slavery succeed alternately, ignorance and knowledge give place to each other but the cherry-tree will still remain in the woods of greece, spain, and italy, and will never be affected by the revolutions of human society.

it is not two thousand years since vines were transplanted into france, though there is no climate in the world more favourable to them. it is not three centuries since horses, cows, sheep, swine, dogs, corn, were known in america. is it possible, that during the revolutions of a whole eternity, there never arose a columbus, who might open the communication between europe and that continent? we may as well imagine, that all men would wear stockings for ten thousand years, and never have the sense to think of garters to tie them. all these seem convincing proofs of the youth, or rather infancy, of the world; as being founded on the operation of principles more constant and steady than those by which human society is governed and directed. nothing less than a total convulsion of the elements will ever destroy all the european animals and vegetables which are now to be found in the western world.
it is less than two thousand years since vines were transplanted into france, though there is no climate in the world more favourable to them. it is less than three centuries since horses, cows, sheep, pigs, dogs, and corn were first known in america. is it possible that during the revolutions of a whole eternity there never arose a columbus who could put europe into communication with that continent? we may as well imagine that all men would wear stockings for ten thousand years, and never have the sense to think of garters to tie them. all these seem convincing proofs that the world is young, indeed a mere infant; because the argument involving them is based on principles that are more constant and steady than those by which human society is governed and directed. it would take a total convulsion of the elements to destroy all the european animals and vegetables that are now to be found on the american continent.

and what argument have you against such convulsions? replied philo. strong and almost incontestable proofs may be traced over the whole earth, that every part of this globe has continued for many ages entirely covered with water. and though order were supposed inseparable from matter, and inherent in it; yet may matter be susceptible of many and great revolutions, through the endless periods of eternal duration. the incessant changes, to which every part of it is subject, seem to intimate some such general transformations; though, at the same time, it is observable, that all the changes and corruptions of which we have ever had experience, are but passages from one state of order to another; nor can matter ever rest in total deformity and confusion. what we see in the parts, we may infer in the whole; at least, that is the method of reasoning on which you rest your whole theory. and were i obliged to defend any particular system of this nature, which i never willingly should do, i esteem none more plausible than that which ascribes an eternal inherent principle of order to the world, though attended with great and continual revolutions and alterations. this at once solves all difficulties; and if the solution, by being so general, is not entirely complete and satisfactory, it is at least a theory that we must sooner or later have recourse to, whatever system we embrace. how could things have been as they are, were there not an original inherent principle of order somewhere, in thought or in matter? and it is very indifferent to which of these we give the preference. chance has no place, on any hypothesis, sceptical or religious. every thing is surely governed by steady, inviolable laws. and were the inmost essence of things laid open to us, we should then discover a scene, of which, at present, we can have no idea. instead of admiring the order of natural beings, we should clearly see that it was absolutely impossible for them, in the smallest article, ever to admit of any other disposition.
well, what argument have you against such convulsions? replied philo. strong and almost incontestable evidence can be found over the whole earth that every part of this planet has for centuries been entirely covered with water. and even if order is inseparable from matter and inherent in it, still matter may be susceptible of many and great revolutions through the endless periods of eternal duration. we can see that in the changes and collapses of which we have had experience the world has merely passed from one state of order to another; and matter can't ever stay in a totally disordered and confused state. still, the constant changes that occur in every part of the material world seem to suggest that some such general transformations sometimes occur. what we see in the parts we may infer in the whole at any rate that's the pattern of argument on which you rest your whole theory. and if i had to defend some particular system of this type (which i would never do willingly!), i find none of them more plausible than the theory that ascribes to the world an eternal inherent ordering force, though accompanied by great and continual revolutions and alterations. this at once solves all the difficulties; and if the solution is too lacking in detail to be entirely complete and satisfactory, it is at least a theory that we must eventually accept, whatever more detailed system we embrace. how could things have been as they are if there were not an original inherent principle of order somewhere in thought or in matter? it doesn't matter in the slightest which of these thought or matter we prefer. no hypothesis, whether sceptical or religious, should make room for chance; everything is surely governed by steady, inviolable laws. and if the inmost essence of things were laid open to us, we would then discover a scene of which at present we can have no idea. instead of wondering at the order of natural things, we would see clearly that it was absolutely impossible for their ordering to be different even in some tiny detail from what it is in actuality.

were any one inclined to revive the ancient pagan theology, which maintained, as we learn from hesiod, that this globe was governed by 30,000 deities, who arose from the unknown powers of nature: you would naturally object, cleanthes, that nothing is gained by this hypothesis; and that it is as easy to suppose all men animals, beings more numerous, but less perfect, to have sprung immediately from a like origin. push the same inference a step further, and you will find a numerous society of deities as explicable as one universal deity, who possesses within himself the powers and perfections of the whole society. all these systems, then, of scepticism, polytheism, and theism, you must allow, on your principles, to be on a like footing, and that no one of them has any advantage over the others. you may thence learn the fallacy of your principles.
if anyone wanted to revive the ancient pagan theology which maintained, as we learn from hesiod, that this planet was governed by 30,000 gods who arose from the unknown powers of nature, you would naturally object, cleanthes, that nothing is gained by this hypothesis, and that it's as easy to suppose all men and animals more numerous, but less perfect to have sprung immediately from a source of that kind. push the same inference a step further and you will find that a large society of gods is no harder to explain than one universal god who contains within himself the powers and perfections of the whole society. so you must allow that all these systems scepticism, polytheism, and theism are on an equal footing when judged by your principles. that shows you that your principles are wrong.

part 7
part 7

but here, continued philo, in examining the ancient system of the soul of the world, there strikes me, all on a sudden, a new idea, which, if just, must go near to subvert all your reasoning, and destroy even your first inferences, on which you repose such confidence. if the universe bears a greater likeness to animal bodies and to vegetables, than to the works of human art, it is more probable that its cause resembles the cause of the former than that of the latter, and its origin ought rather to be ascribed to generation or vegetation, than to reason or design. your conclusion, even according to your own principles, is therefore lame and defective.
in thinking about the ancient system of god as the mind of the world, philo continued, i have just been struck by a new idea. if it is right, it comes close to subverting all your reasoning, and destroying even the first inferences in which you place such confidence. if the universe resembles animal bodies and plants more than it does the works of human skill, it is more probable that its cause resembles the cause of the former than the cause of the latter; so its origin ought to be ascribed to generation or vegetation rather than to reason or design. so your conclusion is lame and defective, even according to your own principles.

pray open up this argument a little further, said demea, for i do not rightly apprehend it in that concise manner in which you have expressed it.
please expand this argument a little, said demea, for i haven't properly grasped it in the concise form in which you have expressed it.

our friend cleanthes, replied philo, as you have heard, asserts, that since no question of fact can be proved otherwise than by experience, the existence of a deity admits not of proof from any other medium. the world, says he, resembles the works of human contrivance; therefore its cause must also resemble that of the other. here we may remark, that the operation of one very small part of nature, to wit man, upon another very small part, to wit that inanimate matter lying within his reach, is the rule by which cleanthes judges of the origin of the whole; and he measures objects, so widely disproportioned, by the same individual standard. but to waive all objections drawn from this topic, i affirm, that there are other parts of the universe (besides the machines of human invention) which bear still a greater resemblance to the fabric of the world, and which, therefore, afford a better conjecture concerning the universal origin of this system. these parts are animals and vegetables. the world plainly resembles more an animal or a vegetable, than it does a watch or a knitting-loom. its cause, therefore, it is more probable, resembles the cause of the former. the cause of the former is generation or vegetation. the cause, therefore, of the world, we may infer to be something similar or analogous to generation or vegetation.
our friend cleanthes, replied philo, as you have heard, asserts that since no question of fact can be answered except through experience, the existence of a god cannot be proved in any other way. the world, he says, resembles things made by human skill; so its cause must also resemble the cause of human artifacts. i note in passing that the operation of one very small part of nature, namely man, on another very small part, namely the inanimate matter lying within his reach, is the basis on which cleanthes judges of the origin of the whole of nature; he measures the vast whole by the same individual standard as he does the tiny parts. but i shan't press that point. if we are going to argue from parts to the whole, let us at least be careful about what parts we select for this special treatment. i affirm that some parts of the universe other than the machines of human invention are still more like the fabric of the world than machines are, and therefore point to a better conjecture about the origin of this whole system of the universe. these parts are animals and plants. the world plainly resembles an animal or a plant more than it does a watch or a knitting-loom. its cause is therefore more likely to resemble the cause of the former than to resemble the cause of the latter. the cause of the former is generation or vegetation. so we can conclude that the cause of the world is something similar or analogous to generation or vegetation.

but how is it conceivable, said demea, that the world can arise from any thing similar to vegetation or generation?
but how is it conceivable, said demea, that the world can arise from anything similar to vegetation or generation?

very easily, replied philo. in like manner as a tree sheds its seed into the neighbouring fields, and produces other trees; so the great vegetable, the world, or this planetary system, produces within itself certain seeds, which, being scattered into the surrounding chaos, vegetate into new worlds. a comet, for instance, is the seed of a world; and after it has been fully ripened, by passing from sun to sun, and star to star, it is at last tossed into the unformed elements which every where surround this universe, and immediately sprouts up into a new system.
very easily, replied philo. here is one way it could happen. just as a tree sheds its seeds into the neighbouring fields and produces other trees, so the great plant, the world or this planetary system, produces within itself certain seeds which it scatters into the surrounding chaos in which they grow into new worlds. a comet, for instance, is the seed of a world; and after it has been fully ripened by passing from sun to sun and star to star, it is at last tossed into the unformed elements which everywhere surround this universe, and immediately sprouts up into a new system.

or if, for the sake of variety (for i see no other advantage), we should suppose this world to be an animal; a comet is the egg of this animal: and in like manner as an ostrich lays its egg in the sand, which, without any further care, hatches the egg, and produces a new animal; so...
or we might suppose this world to be an animal. (there is no advantage in this, but let's try it just for variety.) so: a comet is the egg of this animal; and just as an ostrich lays its egg in the sand, where the egg hatches without any further care, and produces a new animal, so

i understand you, says demea: but what wild, arbitrary suppositions are these! what data have you for such extraordinary conclusions? and is the slight, imaginary resemblance of the world to a vegetable or an animal sufficient to establish the same inference with regard to both? objects, which are in general so widely different, ought they to be a standard for each other?
i understand you, interrupted demea, but what wild, arbitrary suppositions are these? what data have you for such extraordinary conclusions? is the slight, imaginary resemblance of the world to a plant or an animal sufficient to support conclusions about the world based on what happens with plants or animals? ought objects that are in general so widely different be taken as a standard for each other?

right, cries philo: this is the topic on which i have all along insisted. i have still asserted, that we have no data to establish any system of cosmogony. our experience, so imperfect in itself, and so limited both in extent and duration, can afford us no probable conjecture concerning the whole of things. but if we must needs fix on some hypothesis; by what rule, pray, ought we to determine our choice? is there any other rule than the greater similarity of the objects compared? and does not a plant or an animal, which springs from vegetation or generation, bear a stronger resemblance to the world, than does any artificial machine, which arises from reason and design?
right! exclaimed philo: that is what i have been insisting on all along. i have gone on asserting that we have no data to establish any system of cosmogony. our experience, which is so imperfect in itself and which covers such small stretches of space and time, can't give us any probable conjecture concerning the whole of things. but if we have to settle for some hypothesis, tell me what rule we can use to make our choice. is there any rule except the one that bases the greater acceptability of an hypothesis on the greater similarity of the objects compared? and doesn't a plant or an animal that arises from vegetation or generation resemble the world more closely than does any artificial machine that arises from reason and design?

but what is this vegetation and generation of which you talk? said demea. can you explain their operations, and anatomise that fine internal structure on which they depend?
but what is this vegetation and generation of which you talk? said demea. can you explain how they work, and lay out the details of that fine internal structure on which they depend?

as much, at least, replied philo, as cleanthes can explain the operations of reason, or anatomise that internal structure on which it depends. but without any such elaborate disquisitions, when i see an animal, i infer, that it sprang from generation; and that with as great certainty as you conclude a house to have been reared by design. these words, generation, reason, mark only certain powers and energies in nature, whose effects are known, but whose essence is incomprehensible; and one of these principles, more than the other, has no privilege for being made a standard to the whole of nature.
i can do that, replied philo, at least as well as cleanthes can explain how reason works, or lay out in detail the internal structure on which it depends! but i don't need to go into all that: it is enough that when i see an animal, i infer that it arose from generation, and am as sure of this as you are when you infer that a house arose from design. the words generation and reason serve merely to label certain powers and energies in nature. we know the effects of these powers, but have no grasp of their essence; and neither of them has a better claim that the other to be made a standard for the whole of nature.

in reality, demea, it may reasonably be expected, that the larger the views are which we take of things, the better will they conduct us in our conclusions concerning such extraordinary and such magnificent subjects. in this little corner of the world alone, there are four principles, reason, instinct, generation, vegetation, which are similar to each other, and are the causes of similar effects. what a number of other principles may we naturally suppose in the immense extent and variety of the universe, could we travel from planet to planet, and from system to system, in order to examine each part of this mighty fabric? any one of these four principles above mentioned, (and a hundred others which lie open to our conjecture,) may afford us a theory by which to judge of the origin of the world; and it is a palpable and egregious partiality to confine our view entirely to that principle by which our own minds operate. were this principle more intelligible on that account, such a partiality might be somewhat excusable: but reason, in its internal fabric and structure, is really as little known to us as instinct or vegetation; and, perhaps, even that vague, indeterminate word, nature, to which the vulgar refer every thing, is not at the bottom more inexplicable. the effects of these principles are all known to us from experience; but the principles themselves, and their manner of operation, are totally unknown; nor is it less intelligible, or less conformable to experience, to say, that the world arose by vegetation, from a seed shed by another world, than to say that it arose from a divine reason or contrivance, according to the sense in which cleanthes understands it.
in fact, demea, we can reasonably expect that the wider the range of facts that we take in, the better they will guide us in our conclusions about such extraordinary and magnificent subjects. in this little corner of the world alone, there are four principles: reason, instinct, generation, vegetation, that are similar to each other and are the causes of similar effects. how many other principles can we naturally suppose to be at work in the immense extent and variety of the universe principles that we might discover if we could travel from planet to planet, and from system to system, so to examine each part of this mighty structure? any one of the above four principles (and a hundred others which lie open if not to our senses, then at least to our conjecture) can give us a theory about the origin of the world; and to confine our view entirely to the one of the four that governs how our own minds operate namely, reason is to be guilty of gross bias. if reason were more intelligible to us than the other three principles because it governs our minds, there would be some excuse for our bias in its favour; but that isn't how things stand, because the internal structure of reason is really as little known to us as are the structures of instinct and vegetation. even that vague, indeterminate word nature, which common people drag in to explain everything, stands for something that is basically no more inexplicable than reason. our experience shows us the effects of these principles; but the principles themselves, and their ways of working, are totally unknown to us. to say: the world arose by vegetation from a seed shed by another world is not less intelligible, or less in harmony with experience, than to say: the world arose from a divine reason or plan, taking this in the sense in which cleanthes understands it.

but methinks, said demea, if the world had a vegetative quality, and could sow the seeds of new worlds into the infinite chaos, this power would be still an additional argument for design in its author. for whence could arise so wonderful a faculty but from design? or how can order spring from any thing which perceives not that order which it bestows?
but if the world did have a vegetative quality, said demea, and could sow the seeds of new worlds into the infinite chaos, i would see this power as a further argument for design in its author. for where could such a wonderful power come from if not from design? how can order spring from anything which doesn't perceive the order which it gives?

you need only look around you, replied philo, to satisfy yourself with regard to this question. a tree bestows order and organisation on that tree which springs from it, without knowing the order; an animal in the same manner on its offspring; a bird on its nest; and instances of this kind are even more frequent in the world than those of order, which arise from reason and contrivance. to say, that all this order in animals and vegetables proceeds ultimately from design, is begging the question; nor can that great point be ascertained otherwise than by proving, a priori, both that order is, from its nature, inseparably attached to thought; and that it can never of itself, or from original unknown principles, belong to matter.
you need only look around you, replied philo, to get the answer to this question. a tree gives order and organization to the tree that arises from it, without knowing that order; similarly with an animal and its offspring, a bird and its nest. there are in the world more examples of this kind than there are instances of order arising from reason and planning. to say that all this order in animals and plants proceeds ultimately from design is to assume the very point that is at issue. the only way to settle the point in favour of design would be to prove a priori both that order is from its own nature inseparably attached to thought, and that order is prevented from belonging to matter, either by its own nature or by some unknown basic principle.

but further, demea; this objection which you urge can never be made use of by cleanthes, without renouncing a defence which he has already made against one of my objections. when i inquired concerning the cause of that supreme reason and intelligence into which he resolves every thing; he told me, that the impossibility of satisfying such inquiries could never be admitted as an objection in any species of philosophy. we must stop somewhere, says he; nor is it ever within the reach of human capacity to explain ultimate causes, or show the last connections of any objects. it is sufficient, if any steps, so far as we go, are supported by experience and observation. now, that vegetation and generation, as well as reason, are experienced to be principles of order in nature, is undeniable. if i rest my system of cosmogony on the former, preferably to the latter, it is at my choice. the matter seems entirely arbitrary. and when cleanthes asks me what is the cause of my great vegetative or generative faculty, i am equally entitled to ask him the cause of his great reasoning principle. these questions we have agreed to forbear on both sides; and it is chiefly his interest on the present occasion to stick to this agreement. judging by our limited and imperfect experience, generation has some privileges above reason: for we see every day the latter arise from the former, never the former from the latter.
furthermore, demea, the objection you have just brought can't be made by cleanthes unless he gives up a defence that he used against one of my objections. when i asked about the cause of that supreme reason and intelligence from which he derives everything else, cleanthes said this: the impossibility of answering such questions is never a legitimate objection in any kind of philosophy. we must stop somewhere; and wherever we stop, more questions can be raised, because humans will never be able to explain ultimate causes, or to show the absolutely basic connections between things. all that should be demanded is that whatever steps we do take be supported by experience and observation. now it can't be denied that order in nature is found by experience to come from vegetation and generation, as well as from reason. it is for me to choose whether to base my system of cosmogony on the former rather than on the latter. the choice seems entirely arbitrary. and when cleanthes asks me what the cause is of my vegetative or generative faculty, i am equally entitled to ask him what causes his reasoning principle. we have agreed to pass up these questions on both sides, and in our present context it is in his interests to stick to this agreement. judging by our limited and imperfect experience, generation has some privileges over reason: for we see every day reason arise from generation for example, my reason, which has in its causal ancestry my parent's begetting of me but never see generation arise from reason.

compare, i beseech you, the consequences on both sides. the world, say i, resembles an animal; therefore it is an animal, therefore it arose from generation. the steps, i confess, are wide; yet there is some small appearance of analogy in each step. the world, says cleanthes, resembles a machine; therefore it is a machine, therefore it arose from design. the steps are here equally wide, and the analogy less striking. and if he pretends to carry on my hypothesis a step further, and to infer design or reason from the great principle of generation, on which i insist; i may, with better authority, use the same freedom to push further his hypothesis, and infer a divine generation or theogony from his principle of reason. i have at least some faint shadow of experience, which is the utmost that can ever be attained in the present subject. reason, in innumerable instances, is observed to arise from the principle of generation, and never to arise from any other principle.
please compare the consequences on both sides. the world, i say, resembles an animal, so it is an animal, so it arose from generation. the steps in that argument are jumps, i admit, but each of them involves some small appearance of analogy between world and animal. the world, says cleanthes, resembles a machine, so it is a machine, so it arose from design. these steps are jumps too, and here the analogy between world and machine is less striking. and if he claims to push one step further than my hypothesis, by inferring that design or reason caused the great principle of generation which i have emphasized, i have a better right to push one step further than his hypothesis, by inferring that a divine generation or god-birth caused his principle of reason. i have empirical evidence on my side, because reason is observed in countless cases to arise from generation, and never to arise from any other source. this is admittedly only a faint shadow of evidence for my hypothesis, but on this topic faint shadows are the best we can do.

hesiod, and all the ancient mythologists, were so struck with this analogy, that they universally explained the origin of nature from an animal birth, and copulation. plato too, so far as he is intelligible, seems to have adopted some such notion in his timaeus.
the ancient mythologists were so struck with this analogy that they all explained the origin of nature in terms of birth and copulation. plato too, so far as he is intelligible, seems to have adopted some such notion in his timaeus.

the brahmins assert, that the world arose from an infinite spider, who spun this whole complicated mass from his bowels, and annihilates afterwards the whole or any part of it, by absorbing it again, and resolving it into his own essence. here is a species of cosmogony, which appears to us ridiculous; because a spider is a little contemptible animal, whose operations we are never likely to take for a model of the whole universe. but still here is a new species of analogy, even in our globe. and were there a planet wholly inhabited by spiders, (which is very possible,) this inference would there appear as natural and irrefragable as that which in our planet ascribes the origin of all things to design and intelligence, as explained by cleanthes. why an orderly system may not be spun from the belly as well as from the brain, it will be difficult for him to give a satisfactory reason.
the brahmins assert that the world arose from an infinitely large spider who spun this whole complicated mass from his bowels, and then annihilates all or some of it by absorbing it again and taking it into his own essence. here is a kind of cosmogony that strikes us as ridiculous because a spider is a negligible little animal whose doings we are never likely to take for a model of the whole universe. still, even for us on our planet, this is a new kind of analogy for us to think about. if there were (as there well might be) a planet wholly inhabited by spiders, this inference would seem there as natural and secure against criticism as the one that here ascribes the origin of all things to design and intelligence, as explained by cleanthes. he will find it hard to give a satisfactory reason why an orderly system might not be spun from the belly as well as from the brain,

i must confess, philo, replied cleanthes, that of all men living, the task which you have undertaken, of raising doubts and objections, suits you best, and seems, in a manner, natural and unavoidable to you. so great is your fertility of invention, that i am not ashamed to acknowledge myself unable, on a sudden, to solve regularly such out-of-the-way difficulties as you incessantly start upon me: though i clearly see, in general, their fallacy and error. and i question not, but you are yourself, at present, in the same case, and have not the solution so ready as the objection: while you must be sensible, that common sense and reason are entirely against you; and that such whimsies as you have delivered, may puzzle, but never can convince us.
i must say, philo, replied cleanthes, that the task you have undertaken, of raising doubts and objections, suits you better than it does anyone else alive; it seems in a way natural and unavoidable to you. you are so fertile in your inventions that i am not ashamed to admit that i can't, straight off, solve in a disciplined way such out-of-the-way difficulties as you keep launching at me, though i can clearly see in a general way that they are wrong. i have no doubt that you are at present in the same position as i am, not having any solution as ready to hand as the objection. and you must be aware that common sense and reason are entirely against you, and that whimsical hypotheses like the ones you have produced may puzzle us but can never convince us.

part 8
part 8

what you ascribe to the fertility of my invention, replied philo, is entirely owing to the nature of the subject. in subjects adapted to the narrow compass of human reason, there is commonly but one determination, which carries probability or conviction with it; and to a man of sound judgement, all other suppositions, but that one, appear entirely absurd and chimerical. but in such questions as the present, a hundred contradictory views may preserve a kind of imperfect analogy; and invention has here full scope to exert itself. without any great effort of thought, i believe that i could, in an instant, propose other systems of cosmogony, which would have some faint appearance of truth, though it is a thousand, a million to one, if either yours or any one of mine be the true system.
what you ascribe to the fertility of my invention, replied philo, comes purely from the nature of the subject. in topics that are suited to our limited human reason there is often only one view that carries probability or conviction with it; and to a man of sound judgment all other suppositions appear entirely absurd and fanciful. but in questions like our present one, a hundred mutually contradictory views can get some kind of support, because each preserves a kind of imperfect analogy; so here, with all those contenders and no clear winner, invention has full scope to exert itself. i believe that i could, in an instant and with no great effort of thought, propose still further systems of cosmogony that would have some faint appearance of truth, though the odds are a thousand indeed a million to one against any of them, or yours, being the true system.

for instance, what if i should revive the old epicurean hypothesis? this is commonly, and i believe justly, esteemed the most absurd system that has yet been proposed; yet i know not whether, with a few alterations, it might not be brought to bear a faint appearance of probability. instead of supposing matter infinite, as epicurus did, let us suppose it finite. a finite number of particles is only susceptible of finite transpositions: and it must happen, in an eternal duration, that every possible order or position must be tried an infinite number of times. this world, therefore, with all its events, even the most minute, has before been produced and destroyed, and will again be produced and destroyed, without any bounds and limitations. no one, who has a conception of the powers of infinite, in comparison of finite, will ever scruple this determination.
for instance, what if i should revive the old epicurean hypothesis? this is commonly and i think rightly regarded as the most absurd system ever yet proposed; but i suspect that with a few alterations it might be given a faint appearance of probability. instead of supposing matter to be infinite, as epicurus did, let us suppose it to be finite and also suppose space to be finite, while still supposing time to be infinite. a finite number of particles in a finite space can have only a finite number of transpositions; and in an infinitely long period of time every possible order or position of particles must occur an infinite number of times. so this world, with all its events right down to the tiniest details, has already been produced and destroyed and will again be produced and destroyed an unlimited number of times. no-one who properly grasps the difference between infinite and finite will have any trouble with this conclusion.

but this supposes, said demea, that matter can acquire motion, without any voluntary agent or first mover.
but this presupposes, said demea, that matter can come to move without any voluntary agent or first mover.

and where is the difficulty, replied philo, of that supposition? every event, before experience, is equally difficult and incomprehensible; and every event, after experience, is equally easy and intelligible. motion, in many instances, from gravity, from elasticity, from electricity, begins in matter, without any known voluntary agent: and to suppose always, in these cases, an unknown voluntary agent, is mere hypothesis; and hypothesis attended with no advantages. the beginning of motion in matter itself is as conceivable a priori as its communication from mind and intelligence.
and where's the difficulty in that? replied philo. in advance of experience every outcome is as hard to credit and as incomprehensible as every other; and after experience every outcome is as easy to believe and as intelligible as every other. matter often starts to move through gravity, through elasticity, through electricity, without any known voluntary agent; and to suppose that in all these cases there is an unknown voluntary agent is merely to put forward an hypothesis and one that has no advantages. that unaided matter should put itself into motion is as conceivable a priori as that it should be put into motion by mind and intelligence.

besides, why may not motion have been propagated by impulse through all eternity, and the same stock of it, or nearly the same, be still upheld in the universe? as much is lost by the composition of motion, as much is gained by its resolution. and whatever the causes are, the fact is certain, that matter is, and always has been, in continual agitation, as far as human experience or tradition reaches. there is not probably, at present, in the whole universe, one particle of matter at absolute rest.
besides, why can't motion have been passed from object to object by impact, and the same (or nearly the same) stock of it go on being maintained in the universe? the motion lost in one process is gained in the opposite process. and whatever the causes of it are, the fact is certain that matter is and always has been in continual agitation, as far as human experience or tradition reaches. in the whole universe right now there is probably not one particle of matter at absolute rest.

and this very consideration too, continued philo, which we have stumbled on in the course of the argument, suggests a new hypothesis of cosmogony, that is not absolutely absurd and improbable. is there a system, an order, an economy of things, by which matter can preserve that perpetual agitation which seems essential to it, and yet maintain a constancy in the forms which it produces? there certainly is such an economy; for this is actually the case with the present world. the continual motion of matter, therefore, in less than infinite transpositions, must produce this economy or order; and by its very nature, that order, when once established, supports itself, for many ages, if not to eternity. but wherever matter is so poised, arranged, and adjusted, as to continue in perpetual motion, and yet preserve a constancy in the forms, its situation must, of necessity, have all the same appearance of art and contrivance which we observe at present. all the parts of each form must have a relation to each other, and to the whole; and the whole itself must have a relation to the other parts of the universe; to the element in which the form subsists; to the materials with which it repairs its waste and decay; and to every other form which is hostile or friendly. a defect in any of these particulars destroys the form; and the matter of which it is composed is again set loose, and is thrown into irregular motions and fermentations, till it unite itself to some other regular form. if no such form be prepared to receive it, and if there be a great quantity of this corrupted matter in the universe, the universe itself is entirely disordered; whether it be the feeble embryo of a world in its first beginnings that is thus destroyed, or the rotten carcass of one languishing in old age and infirmity. in either case, a chaos ensues; till finite, though innumerable revolutions produce at last some forms, whose parts and organs are so adjusted as to support the forms amidst a continued succession of matter.
philo went on: and this very consideration that we have stumbled on in the course of the argument suggests yet another hypothesis of cosmogony that isn't entirely absurd and improbable. is there a system, an order, an arrangement of things, through which matter can preserve the perpetual agitation that seems essential to it and yet maintain a constancy in the forms it produces? yes, there certainly is such an arrangement, for this is actually the case with the present world in which matter is constantly moving, and yet many forms and structures remain the same. if matter moves continually and has only a finite number of orderings into which it can fall assuming that matter and space are both finite, it must eventually produce this arrangement or order that the world actually has; and by its very nature this order once it is established supports itself for many ages, if not to eternity. but wherever matter is poised, arranged, and adjusted in such a way as to continue in perpetual motion and yet preserve a constancy in the forms, the state of affairs is bound to have the very same appearance of planning and skill that we observe at present. every part of each form must be related to each other part of it and to the whole form; and the whole form itself must be related to the other parts of the universe to the element in which the form subsists, to the materials with which it repairs its waste and decay, and to every other form which is hostile or friendly towards it. a defect in any of those respects as when arteries fail to carry blood to the brain, or a trout becomes unable to get oxygen out of the water it swims in, or a heron becomes unable to escape hawks or to capture fish destroys the form; and the matter of which it is composed is again set loose, and is thrown into irregular motions and fermentations until it unites itself to some other regular form, for example by being eaten. if no such form is prepared to receive it, and if there is a great quantity of this corrupted matter in the universe, the universe itself comes to be entirely disordered; and this holds true whether what is destroyed is the feeble embryo of a world in its first beginnings or the rotten carcass of a world drifting into old age and infirmity. in either case a chaos ensues, until through countlessly (though not infinitely) many re-arrangements there come to be, yet again, some forms whose parts and organs are so adjusted that they enable the forms to stay in existence while the matter in them continually changes.

suppose (for we shall endeavour to vary the expression), that matter were thrown into any position, by a blind, unguided force; it is evident that this first position must, in all probability, be the most confused and most disorderly imaginable, without any resemblance to those works of human contrivance, which, along with a symmetry of parts, discover an adjustment of means to ends, and a tendency to self-preservation. if the actuating force cease after this operation, matter must remain for ever in disorder, and continue an immense chaos, without any proportion or activity. but suppose that the actuating force, whatever it be, still continues in matter, this first position will immediately give place to a second, which will likewise in all probability be as disorderly as the first, and so on through many successions of changes and revolutions. no particular order or position ever continues a moment unaltered. the original force, still remaining in activity, gives a perpetual restlessness to matter. every possible situation is produced, and instantly destroyed. if a glimpse or dawn of order appears for a moment, it is instantly hurried away, and confounded, by that never-ceasing force which actuates every part of matter.
i shall try to put all this differently. suppose that matter is thrown into some position by a blind, unguided force. it is obvious that this first position must in all probability be utterly confused and disorderly, with no resemblance to the human artifacts which display, along with a symmetry of parts, an adjustment of means to ends, and a tendency to self-preservation. if the original actuating force ceases after this first operation and stops imparting motion to matter, matter will have to remain for ever in disorder, and continue to be an immense chaos without any proportion or activity. but suppose that the actuating force (whatever it may be) still continues to drive matter along, this first position will immediately give place to a second, which will likewise in all probability be as disorderly as the first, and so on through many series of changes and revolutions. no particular order or position ever stays unaltered for a moment. the original force, still at work, gives a perpetual restlessness to matter. every possible state of affairs is produced, and instantly destroyed. if a glimpse or dawn of order appears for a moment, it is instantly hurried away, reduced to a confusion, by that never-ceasing force which drives every part of the material world.

thus the universe goes on for many ages in a continued succession of chaos and disorder. but is it not possible that it may settle at last, so as not to lose its motion and active force (for that we have supposed inherent in it), yet so as to preserve an uniformity of appearance, amidst the continual motion and fluctuation of its parts? this we find to be the case with the universe at present. every individual is perpetually changing, and every part of every individual; and yet the whole remains, in appearance, the same. may we not hope for such a position, or rather be assured of it, from the eternal revolutions of unguided matter; and may not this account for all the appearing wisdom and contrivance which is in the universe? let us contemplate the subject a little, and we shall find, that this adjustment, if attained by matter of a seeming stability in the forms, with a real and perpetual revolution or motion of parts, affords a plausible, if not a true solution of the difficulty.
thus the universe goes on for many ages in a continuous series of states of chaos and disorder. but couldn't it happen that it eventually settles down, not so as to lose its motion and active force (for we are assuming that that is inherent in it), but so as to preserve a uniformity of appearance through all the hubbub of its moving parts? this is what we find to be the actual state of the universe at present. every individual is perpetually changing, and so is every part of every individual; and yet the whole appears to be the same. a tiny example: a rabbit takes in pure air and breathes out foul air, it drinks water and emits urine, it eats grass and extrudes faeces; and yet through all this change in its constituent matter it appears to us as the very same rabbit. isn't this state of affairs one that might be hoped for indeed, one that would be sure to arise out of the eternal revolutions of unguided matter; and couldn't this account for all the appearances of wisdom and planning that the universe contains? think about this a little and you'll find that if matter did arrive at this set-up, in which forms seem to be stable while their parts are really moving and changing with them, that would provide a plausible and perhaps a true solution of the problem of explaining the appearance of design in the universe.

it is in vain, therefore, to insist upon the uses of the parts in animals or vegetables, and their curious adjustment to each other. i would fain know, how an animal could subsist, unless its parts were so adjusted? do we not find, that it immediately perishes whenever this adjustment ceases, and that its matter corrupting tries some new form? it happens indeed, that the parts of the world are so well adjusted, that some regular form immediately lays claim to this corrupted matter: and if it were not so, could the world subsist? must it not dissolve as well as the animal, and pass through new positions and situations, till in great, but finite succession, it falls at last into the present or some such order?
so it's pointless to stress the uses of the parts in animals or plants, and their intricate interplay between the parts. i'd like to know how an animal could survive if its parts were not so inter-related! when an animal's parts lose those interrelations, don't we find that it immediately dies and that its decaying flesh and blood try some new form? it happens indeed that the parts of the world are so well adjusted to one another that some regular form immediately lays claim to this decaying matter; if that didn't happen, could the biological world continue to exist? wouldn't it die along with the individual animal, and its constituent matter go through new positions and relationships, until after a vast but finite series of changes it falls at last into an order such as the one we actually have?

it is well, replied cleanthes, you told us, that this hypothesis was suggested on a sudden, in the course of the argument. had you had leisure to examine it, you would soon have perceived the insuperable objections to which it is exposed. no form, you say, can subsist, unless it possess those powers and organs requisite for its subsistence: some new order or economy must be tried, and so on, without intermission; till at last some order, which can support and maintain itself, is fallen upon. but according to this hypothesis, whence arise the many conveniences and advantages which men and all animals possess? two eyes, two ears, are not absolutely necessary for the subsistence of the species. human race might have been propagated and preserved, without horses, dogs, cows, sheep, and those innumerable fruits and products which serve to our satisfaction and enjoyment. if no camels had been created for the use of man in the sandy deserts of africa and arabia, would the world have been dissolved? if no lodestone had been framed to give that wonderful and useful direction to the needle, would human society and the human kind have been immediately extinguished? though the maxims of nature be in general very frugal, yet instances of this kind are far from being rare; and any one of them is a sufficient proof of design, and of a benevolent design, which gave rise to the order and arrangement of the universe.
it is just as well, replied cleanthes, that you told us that this hypothesis came to you suddenly in the course of the argument. if you had taken the time to examine it, you would soon have seen the insuperable objections that it is open to. you say that no form can survive unless it has the powers and organs needed for survival; some new order or arrangement must be tried, and another, and another, and so on without interruption until at last some order that can support and maintain itself happens to come into existence. but according to this hypothesis, what brings about the many conveniences and advantages that men and all animals have? two eyes, two ears, aren't absolutely necessary for the survival of the species. the human race could have existed and continued without there being any horses, dogs, cows, sheep, and those innumerable fruits and products which bring us satisfaction and enjoyment. if no camels had been created for the use of man in the sandy deserts of africa and arabia, would the world have been dissolved? if no magnet had been formed so as to give that wonderful and useful direction to the compass-needle, would human society and the human species have been immediately extinguished? the rules by which nature works are in general far from lavish, but still instances of this kind are far from being rare; and any one of them is a sufficient proof that a design a benevolent design gave rise to the order and arrangement of the universe.

at least, you may safely infer, said philo, that the foregoing hypothesis is so far incomplete and imperfect, which i shall not scruple to allow. but can we ever reasonably expect greater success in any attempts of this nature? or can we ever hope to erect a system of cosmogony, that will be liable to no exceptions, and will contain no circumstance repugnant to our limited and imperfect experience of the analogy of nature? your theory itself cannot surely pretend to any such advantage, even though you have run into anthropomorphism, the better to preserve a conformity to common experience. let us once more put it to trial. in all instances which we have ever seen, ideas are copied from real objects, and are ectypal, not archetypal, to express myself in learned terms: you reverse this order, and give thought the precedence. in all instances which we have ever seen, thought has no influence upon matter, except where that matter is so conjoined with it as to have an equal reciprocal influence upon it. no animal can move immediately any thing but the members of its own body; and indeed, the equality of action and reaction seems to be an universal law of nature: but your theory implies a contradiction to this experience. these instances, with many more, which it were easy to collect, (particularly the supposition of a mind or system of thought that is eternal, or, in other words, an animal ingenerable and immortal); these instances, i say, may teach all of us sobriety in condemning each other, and let us see, that as no system of this kind ought ever to be received from a slight analogy, so neither ought any to be rejected on account of a small incongruity. for that is an inconvenience from which we can justly pronounce no one to be exempted.
at least you can safely conclude, said philo, that the hypothesis i put forward is not yet complete and perfect; and i readily admit that. but can we ever reasonably expect greater success in any attempts of this nature? can we ever hope to construct a system of cosmogony that will be free of exceptions and in no way conflict with our limited and imperfect experience of the analogy of nature? your own theory surely can't claim to be as good as that, even though you have embraced anthropomorphism so as to improve the theory's conformity to common experience. let us try it out yet again. in all instances that we have ever encountered, ideas are copied from real objects. you reverse this order, and make thought come first. in all instances that we have ever encountered, thought has no influence on matter except where that matter is so conjoined with thought as to have an equal reciprocal influence on it. all that an animal can move immediately are parts of its own body and the condition of those can in return affect the animal's mental states; and indeed, the equality of action and reaction seems to be a universal law of nature. your theory implies a contradiction to this experience. it would be easy to assemble plenty more such difficulties, especially in the supposition of a mind or system of thought that is eternal, in other words an animal that was never born and will never die. these instances can teach us all to be moderate in our criticisms of each other, and let us see that just as no system of this kind ought ever to be accepted on the basis of a slight analogy, so none should be rejected on account of a small incongruity. for that is a drawback from which, we can reasonably hold, no system of cosmogony is exempt.

all religious systems, it is confessed, are subject to great and insuperable difficulties. each disputant triumphs in his turn; while he carries on an offensive war, and exposes the absurdities, barbarities, and pernicious tenets of his antagonist. but all of them, on the whole, prepare a complete triumph for the sceptic; who tells them, that no system ought ever to be embraced with regard to such subjects: for this plain reason, that no absurdity ought ever to be assented to with regard to any subject. a total suspense of judgement is here our only reasonable resource. and if every attack, as is commonly observed, and no defence, among theologians, is successful; how complete must be his victory, who remains always, with all mankind, on the offensive, and has himself no fixed station or abiding city, which he is ever, on any occasion, obliged to defend?
every religious system is held by many people to be subject to great and insuperable difficulties. each disputant has his period of triumph while he carries on an offensive war, and exposes the absurdities, barbarities, and pernicious doctrines of his antagonist. but religious systems taken all together provide the sceptic with a complete and permanent triumph; for he tells the disputants that no system of cosmogony ought ever to be accepted, for the simple reason that no system of anything ought ever to be accepted if it is absurd. a total suspension of judgment is here our only reasonable resource. and given that we commonly see that among theologians every attack succeeds and every defence fails, how complete a victory must come to someone who remains always on the offensive against all mankind, and has himself no fixed position or abiding city that he is ever obliged to defend?

part 9
part 9

but if so many difficulties attend the argument a posteriori, said demea, had we not better adhere to that simple and sublime argument a priori, which, by offering to us infallible demonstration, cuts off at once all doubt and difficulty? by this argument, too, we may prove the infinity of the divine attributes, which, i am afraid, can never be ascertained with certainty from any other topic. for how can an effect, which either is finite, or, for aught we know, may be so; how can such an effect, i say, prove an infinite cause? the unity too of the divine nature, it is very difficult, if not absolutely impossible, to deduce merely from contemplating the works of nature; nor will the uniformity alone of the plan, even were it allowed, give us any assurance of that attribute. whereas the argument a priori ...
but if there are so many difficulties in the a posteriori argument, said demea, hadn't we better stay with the simple and sublime a priori argument which cuts off all doubt and difficulty with a single blow, by offering to us an infallible knock-down proof? furthermore, this argument lets us prove the infinity of god's attributes that he is infinitely wise, infinitely good, infinitely powerful, and so on which, i am afraid, can never be established with certainty in any other manner. for how can an infinite cause be inferred from an effect that is finite, or that may be finite for all we know to the contrary? the unity of god's nature, also, is very hard if not absolutely impossible to infer merely from observing the works of nature; even if it is granted that the plan of the universe is all of a piece, that isn't enough to ensure us of god's unity. whereas the a priori argument

you seem to reason, demea, interposed cleanthes, as if those advantages and conveniences in the abstract argument were full proofs of its solidity. but it is first proper, in my opinion, to determine what argument of this nature you choose to insist on; and we shall afterwards, from itself, better than from its useful consequences, endeavour to determine what value we ought to put upon it.
cleanthes interrupted: you seem to reason, demea, as if those advantages and conveniences in the abstract a priori argument were full proofs of its soundness. but in my opinion we should first settle what argument with all these advantages you choose to insist on; and then we can try to decide what value to put on it doing this better by looking at the argument itself than by considering its useful consequences.

the argument, replied demea, which i would insist on, is the common one. whatever exists must have a cause or reason of its existence; it being absolutely impossible for any thing to produce itself, or be the cause of its own existence. in mounting up, therefore, from effects to causes, we must either go on in tracing an infinite succession, without any ultimate cause at all; or must at last have recourse to some ultimate cause, that is necessarily existent: now, that the first supposition is absurd, may be thus proved. in the infinite chain or succession of causes and effects, each single effect is determined to exist by the power and efficacy of that cause which immediately preceded; but the whole eternal chain or succession, taken together, is not determined or caused by any thing; and yet it is evident that it requires a cause or reason, as much as any particular object which begins to exist in time. the question is still reasonable, why this particular succession of causes existed from eternity, and not any other succession, or no succession at all. if there be no necessarily existent being, any supposition which can be formed is equally possible; nor is there any more absurdity in nothing's having existed from eternity, than there is in that succession of causes which constitutes the universe. what was it, then, which determined something to exist rather than nothing, and bestowed being on a particular possibility, exclusive of the rest? external causes, there are supposed to be none. chance is a word without a meaning. was it nothing? but that can never produce any thing. we must, therefore, have recourse to a necessarily existent being, who carries the reason of his existence in himself, and who cannot be supposed not to exist, without an express contradiction. there is, consequently, such a being; that is, there is a deity.
the argument that i would insist on, replied demea, is the common one: whatever exists must have a cause or reason for its existence, as it is absolutely impossible for anything to produce itself, or be the cause of its own existence. in working back, therefore, from effects to causes, we must either (1) go on tracing causes to infinity, without any ultimate cause at all, or (2) at last have recourse to some ultimate cause that is necessarily existent and therefore doesn't need an external cause. supposition (1) is absurd, as i now prove: in the supposed infinite chain or series of causes and effects, each single effect is made to exist by the power and efficacy of the cause that immediately preceded it; but the whole eternal chain or series, considered as a whole, is not caused by anything; and yet it obviously requires a cause or reason, as much as any particular thing that begins to exist in time. we are entitled to ask why this particular series of causes existed from eternity, and not some other series, or no series at all. if there is no necessarily existent being, all the suppositions we can make about this are equally possible; and there is no more absurdity in nothing's having existed from eternity than there is in the series of causes that constitutes the universe. what was it, then, that made something exist rather than nothing, and gave existence to one particular possibility as against any of the others?external causes? we are supposing that there aren't any. chance? that's a word without a meaning. was it nothing? but that can never produce anything. so we must adopt supposition (2), and have recourse to a necessarily existent being, who carries the reason of his existence in himself and cannot be supposed not to exist without an express contradiction. so there is such a being; that is, there is a god.

i shall not leave it to philo, said cleanthes, though i know that the starting objections is his chief delight, to point out the weakness of this metaphysical reasoning. it seems to me so obviously ill-grounded, and at the same time of so little consequence to the cause of true piety and religion, that i shall myself venture to show the fallacy of it.
i know that philo loves raising objections, said cleanthes, but i shan't leave it to him to point out the weakness of your metaphysical reasoning. your argument seems to me so obviously ill-grounded, and even if it succeeded to offer so little help to the cause of true piety and religion, that i shall myself venture to show what is wrong with it.

i shall begin with observing, that there is an evident absurdity in pretending to demonstrate a matter of fact, or to prove it by any arguments a priori. nothing is demonstrable, unless the contrary implies a contradiction. nothing, that is distinctly conceivable, implies a contradiction. whatever we conceive as existent, we can also conceive as non-existent. there is no being, therefore, whose non-existence implies a contradiction. consequently there is no being, whose existence is demonstrable. i propose this argument as entirely decisive, and am willing to rest the whole controversy upon it.
i start by remarking that there is an evident absurdity in claiming to demonstrate or to prove by any a priori arguments any matter of fact. nothing is demonstrable unless its contrary implies a contradiction. nothing that is distinctly conceivable implies a contradiction. whatever we conceive as existent, we can also conceive as non-existent. so there is no being whose non-existence implies a contradiction. so there is no being whose existence is demonstrable. i offer this argument as entirely decisive, and am willing to rest the whole controversy on it.

it is pretended that the deity is a necessarily existent being; and this necessity of his existence is attempted to be explained by asserting, that if we knew his whole essence or nature, we should perceive it to be as impossible for him not to exist, as for twice two not to be four. but it is evident that this can never happen, while our faculties remain the same as at present. it will still be possible for us, at any time, to conceive the non-existence of what we formerly conceived to exist; nor can the mind ever lie under a necessity of supposing any object to remain always in being; in the same manner as we lie under a necessity of always conceiving twice two to be four. the words, therefore, necessary existence, have no meaning; or, which is the same thing, none that is consistent.
you claim that god is a necessarily existent being; and the friends of your line of argument try to explain this necessity of his existence by saying that if we knew his whole essence or nature, we would perceive it to be as impossible for him not to exist as for twice two not to be four. but obviously this can never happen, while our faculties remain the same as they are now. it will always be possible for us at any time to conceive the non-existence of something we formerly conceived to exist; the mind can never have to suppose some object to remain always in existence, in the way in which we always have to conceive twice two to be four. so the words necessary existence have no meaning or (the same thing) no meaning that is consistent.

but further, why may not the material universe be the necessarily existent being, according to this pretended explication of necessity? we dare not affirm that we know all the qualities of matter; and for aught we can determine, it may contain some qualities, which, were they known, would make its non-existence appear as great a contradiction as that twice two is five. i find only one argument employed to prove, that the material world is not the necessarily existent being: and this argument is derived from the contingency both of the matter and the form of the world. any particle of matter, it is saiddr. clarke, may be conceived to be annihilated; and any form may be conceived to be altered. such an annihilation or alteration, therefore, is not impossible. but it seems a great partiality not to perceive, that the same argument extends equally to the deity, so far as we have any conception of him; and that the mind can at least imagine him to be non-existent, or his attributes to be altered. it must be some unknown, inconceivable qualities, which can make his non-existence appear impossible, or his attributes unalterable: and no reason can be assigned, why these qualities may not belong to matter. as they are altogether unknown and inconceivable, they can never be proved incompatible with it.
furthermore, if we do go along with this claimed explanation of necessary existence, why shouldn't the material universe be the necessarily existent being? we dare not claim to know all the qualities of matter; and for all we can tell, matter may have some qualities which, if we knew them, would make matter's non-existence appear as great a contradiction as twice two's being five. i have found only one argument trying to prove that the material world is not the necessarily existent being; and this argument is derived from the contingency both of the matter and the form of the world. any particle of matter, dr clarke has said, can be conceived to be annihilated; and any form can be conceived to be altered. such an annihilation or alteration, therefore, is not impossible. but it seems very biased not to see that the same argument applies just as well to god, so far as we have any conception of him; and that our mind can at least imagine god to be non-existent or his attributes to be altered. if something is to make his non-existence appear impossible, or his attributes unalterable, it must be some qualities of his that we don't know and can't conceive; but then no reason can be given why these qualities may not belong to matter. as they are altogether unknown and inconceivable, they can never be proved incompatible with the nature of matter as we know it.

add to this, that in tracing an eternal succession of objects, it seems absurd to inquire for a general cause or first author. how can any thing, that exists from eternity, have a cause, since that relation implies a priority in time, and a beginning of existence?
a further objection: in tracing an eternal series of items, it seems absurd to ask for a general cause or first author of the entire series. how can something that exists from eternity have a cause, since the causal relation implies priority in time and a beginning of existence?

in such a chain, too, or succession of objects, each part is caused by that which preceded it, and causes that which succeeds it. where then is the difficulty? but the whole, you say, wants a cause. i answer, that the uniting of these parts into a whole, like the uniting of several distinct countries into one kingdom, or several distinct members into one body, is performed merely by an arbitrary act of the mind, and has no influence on the nature of things. did i show you the particular causes of each individual in a collection of twenty particles of matter, i should think it very unreasonable, should you afterwards ask me, what was the cause of the whole twenty. this is sufficiently explained in explaining the cause of the parts.
also: in such a chain or series of items, each part is caused by the part that preceded it, and causes the one that follows. so where is the difficulty? but the whole needs a cause! you say. i answer that the uniting of these parts into a whole, like the uniting of several distinct counties into one kingdom, or several distinct members into one organic body, is performed merely by an arbitrary act of the mind and has no influence on the nature of things. if i showed you the particular causes of each individual in a collection of twenty particles of matter, i would think it very unreasonable if you then asked me what was the cause of the whole twenty. the cause of the whole is sufficiently explained by explaining the cause of the parts.

though the reasonings which you have urged, cleanthes, may well excuse me, said philo, from starting any further difficulties, yet i cannot forbear insisting still upon another topic. it is observed by arithmeticians, that the products of 9, compose always either 9, or some lesser product of 9, if you add together all the characters of which any of the former products is composed. thus, of 18, 27, 36, which are products of 9, you make 9 by adding 1 to 8, 2 to 7, 3 to 6. thus, 369 is a product also of 9; and if you add 3, 6, and 9, you make 18, a lesser product of 9. to a superficial observer, so wonderful a regularity may be admired as the effect either of chance or design: but a skilful algebraist immediately concludes it to be the work of necessity, and demonstrates, that it must for ever result from the nature of these numbers. is it not probable, i ask, that the whole economy of the universe is conducted by a like necessity, though no human algebra can furnish a key which solves the difficulty? and instead of admiring the order of natural beings, may it not happen, that, could we penetrate into the intimate nature of bodies, we should clearly see why it was absolutely impossible they could ever admit of any other disposition? so dangerous is it to introduce this idea of necessity into the present question! and so naturally does it afford an inference directly opposite to the religious hypothesis!
your reasonings, cleanthes, may well excuse me from raising any further difficulties, said philo, but i can't resist bringing up another point. arithmeticians have noted that every product of 9 has integers which add up to 9 or to some lesser product of 9. thus, of 18, 27, and 36, which are products of 9, you make 9 by adding 1 to 8, 2 to 7, and 3 to 6. thus, 369 is a product also of 9; and if you add 3, 6, and 9, you make 18, which is a lesser product of 9. to a superficial observer this splendid regularity may be wondered at as the effect either of chance or design; but a skillful algebraist immediately concludes it to be the work of necessity, and demonstrates that it must forever result from the nature of these numbers. isn't it probable, i now ask, that the whole way the universe works depends on this sort of necessity, though no human algebra can provide a key that solves the difficulty? instead of wondering at the order of natural beings, mightn't it be that if we could penetrate into the intimate nature of bodies we would clearly see why it was absolutely impossible for them to be inter-related in any other way? so you run a great risk when you introduce this idea of necessity into the present question, because it naturally supports an inference that is directly opposite to the religious hypothesis!

but dropping all these abstractions, continued philo, and confining ourselves to more familiar topics, i shall venture to add an observation, that the argument a priori has seldom been found very convincing, except to people of a metaphysical head, who have accustomed themselves to abstract reasoning, and who, finding from mathematics, that the understanding frequently leads to truth through obscurity, and, contrary to first appearances, have transferred the same habit of thinking to subjects where it ought not to have place. other people, even of good sense and the best inclined to religion, feel always some deficiency in such arguments, though they are not perhaps able to explain distinctly where it lies; a certain proof that men ever did, and ever will derive their religion from other sources than from this species of reasoning.
anyway, continued philo, dropping all these abstractions and staying with more familiar topics, i venture to remark that the a priori argument has seldom been found very convincing, except to people with metaphysical minds, who have accustomed themselves to abstract reasoning and who have developed bad intellectual habits, because, finding in mathematics that the understanding frequently leads through darkness to truths that at first didn't appear to be true, they have transferred the same habit of thinking to subjects where it isn't appropriate. other people, even ones who have good sense and strong inclinations in favour of religion, always feel that there is something wrong with such arguments as the a priori argument for the existence of god, even though they may not be able to explain distinctly what the defect is; which is a certain proof that men always did and always will derive their religion from sources other than this sort of reasoning.

part 10
part 10

it is my opinion, i own, replied demea, that each man feels, in a manner, the truth of religion within his own breast, and, from a consciousness of his imbecility and misery, rather than from any reasoning, is led to seek protection from that being, on whom he and all nature is dependent. so anxious or so tedious are even the best scenes of life, that futurity is still the object of all our hopes and fears. we incessantly look forward, and endeavour, by prayers, adoration, and sacrifice, to appease those unknown powers, whom we find, by experience, so able to afflict and oppress us. wretched creatures that we are! what resource for us amidst the innumerable ills of life, did not religion suggest some methods of atonement, and appease those terrors with which we are incessantly agitated and tormented?
it is my opinion, i admit, replied demea, that each man somehow feels in his heart the truth of religion, and that what leads him to seek protection from god, the being on whom he and all nature depend, is not any reasoning but rather his consciousness of his own weakness and misery. even the best scenes of life are so troubling or so unpleasant that all our hopes and fears look to the future. we incessantly look forward, and try through prayers, adoration and sacrifice to appease those unknown powers who, we find by experience, can so thoroughly afflict and oppress us. wretched creatures that we are! what help would there be for us amid the innumerable ills of life if religion didn't suggest some ways of reconciling ourselves with god and soothe the terrors with which we are incessantly agitated and tormented?

i am indeed persuaded, said philo, that the best, and indeed the only method of bringing every one to a due sense of religion, is by just representations of the misery and wickedness of men. and for that purpose a talent of eloquence and strong imagery is more requisite than that of reasoning and argument. for is it necessary to prove what every one feels within himself? it is only necessary to make us feel it, if possible, more intimately and sensibly.
i am indeed convinced, said philo, that the best and indeed the only method of bringing everyone to a proper sense of religion is by making them see clearly the misery and wickedness of men. and for that purpose a talent for eloquence and strong imagery is more needed than a talent for reasoning and argument. what need is there to prove something that everyone feels within himself? it is only necessary to make us feel it, if possible, more strongly and intimately.

the people, indeed, replied demea, are sufficiently convinced of this great and melancholy truth. the miseries of life; the unhappiness of man; the general corruptions of our nature; the unsatisfactory enjoyment of pleasures, riches, honours; these phrases have become almost proverbial in all languages. and who can doubt of what all men declare from their own immediate feeling and experience?
indeed, replied demea, the people are sufficiently convinced of this great and melancholy truth. these phrases: the miseries of life the unhappiness of man the general corruptions of our nature the unsatisfactory enjoyment of pleasures, riches, honours have become almost proverbial in all languages. and who can doubt something that all men declare from their own immediate feeling and experience?

in this point, said philo, the learned are perfectly agreed with the vulgar; and in all letters, sacred and profane, the topic of human misery has been insisted on with the most pathetic eloquence that sorrow and melancholy could inspire. the poets, who speak from sentiment, without a system, and whose testimony has therefore the more authority, abound in images of this nature. from homer down to dr. young, the whole inspired tribe have ever been sensible, that no other representation of things would suit the feeling and observation of each individual.
on this point, said philo, the learned are in perfect agreement with the common people; and in all literature, religious and otherwise, the topic of human misery has been stressed with the most pathetic eloquence that sorrow and melancholy could inspire. the works of the poets whose testimony has extra authority because they speak from feeling, without a system abound in images of this sort. from homer down to dr. edward young, the whole inspired tribe of poets have always been aware that if they are to present human life in a way that fits what each individual person sees and feels it as being like, they will have to represent it in that way.

as to authorities, replied demea, you need not seek them. look round this library of cleanthes. i shall venture to affirm, that, except authors of particular sciences, such as chemistry or botany, who have no occasion to treat of human life, there is scarce one of those innumerable writers, from whom the sense of human misery has not, in some passage or other, extorted a complaint and confession of it. at least, the chance is entirely on that side; and no one author has ever, so far as i can recollect, been so extravagant as to deny it.
as for authorities, replied demea, you needn't hunt for them. look around this library of cleanthes. i venture to guess that except for authors of particular sciences such as chemistry or botany, who have no occasion to treat of human life almost every one of those innumerable writers has, somewhere or other, been led by his sense of human misery to testify to it and complain of it. at any rate, the odds are that almost all of them have written in that way; and as far as i can remember no author has gone to the opposite extreme of denying human misery.

there you must excuse me, said philo: leibniz has denied it; and is perhaps the first who ventured upon so bold and paradoxical an opinion; at least, the first who made it essential to his philosophical system.
there you must excuse me, said philo: leibniz has denied it. he is perhaps the first who ventured on such a bold and paradoxical opinion; or, anyway, the first who made it essential to his philosophical system.

and by being the first, replied demea, might he not have been sensible of his error? for is this a subject in which philosophers can propose to make discoveries especially in so late an age? and can any man hope by a simple denial (for the subject scarcely admits of reasoning), to bear down the united testimony of mankind, founded on sense and consciousness?
given that he was the first, replied demea, mightn't that very fact have made him realize that he was wrong? for is this a subject on which philosophers can claim to make discoveries, especially as late in history as this? and can any man hope by a simple denial to outweigh the united testimony of mankind, based on sense and consciousness? (i say a simple denial because the subject scarcely admits of reasoning.)

and why should man, added he, pretend to an exemption from the lot of all other animals? the whole earth, believe me, philo, is cursed and polluted. a perpetual war is kindled amongst all living creatures. necessity, hunger, want, stimulate the strong and courageous: fear, anxiety, terror, agitate the weak and infirm. the first entrance into life gives anguish to the new-born infant and to its wretched parent: weakness, impotence, distress, attend each stage of that life: and it is at last finished in agony and horror.
and, he added, why should man claim to be exempt from the fate of all the other animals? the whole earth, believe me, philo, is cursed and polluted. a perpetual war goes on among all living creatures. need, hunger, and deprivation stimulate the strong and courageous; fear, anxiety and terror agitate the weak and infirm. the first entrance into life brings distress to the new-born infant and to its wretched mother; weakness, impotence and distress accompany each stage of that life: and eventually it reaches its end in agony and horror.

observe too, says philo, the curious artifices of nature, in order to embitter the life of every living being. the stronger prey upon the weaker, and keep them in perpetual terror and anxiety. the weaker too, in their turn, often prey upon the stronger, and vex and molest them without relaxation. consider that innumerable race of insects, which either are bred on the body of each animal, or, flying about, infix their stings in him. these insects have others still less than themselves, which torment them. and thus on each hand, before and behind, above and below, every animal is surrounded with enemies, which incessantly seek his misery and destruction.
observe too, says philo, nature's intricate devices for embittering the life of every living being. the stronger ones prey on the weaker, and keep them in perpetual terror and anxiety. the weaker, in their turn, often prey on the stronger, and vex and trouble them, giving them no respite. think of the innumerable race of insects that either are bred on the body of an animal or, flying about, put their stings into him these insects are themselves tormented by others that are even smaller. and thus on every hand, before and behind, above and below, every animal is surrounded by enemies that constantly seek his misery and destruction.

man alone, said demea, seems to be, in part, an exception to this rule. for by combination in society, he can easily master lions, tigers, and bears, whose greater strength and agility naturally enable them to prey upon him.
man alone, said demea, seems to be a partial exception to this rule. for by coming together in society men can easily master lions, tigers, and bears, whose greater strength and agility naturally enable them to prey on him.

on the contrary, it is here chiefly, cried philo, that the uniform and equal maxims of nature are most apparent. man, it is true, can, by combination, surmount all his real enemies, and become master of the whole animal creation: but does he not immediately raise up to himself imaginary enemies, the demons of his fancy, who haunt him with superstitious terrors, and blast every enjoyment of life? his pleasure, as he imagines, becomes, in their eyes, a crime: his food and repose give them umbrage and offence: his very sleep and dreams furnish new materials to anxious fear: and even death, his refuge from every other ill, presents only the dread of endless and innumerable woes. nor does the wolf molest more the timid flock, than superstition does the anxious breast of wretched mortals.
on the contrary, exclaimed philo, it is just here that we can most clearly see how uniform and equal nature's maxims are! it is true that man can by combining surmount all his real enemies and become master of the whole animal kingdom; but doesn't he immediately conjure up imaginary enemies, the demons of his imagination, who haunt him with superstitious terrors and blast every enjoyment of life? he imagines that they see his pleasure as a crime, and that his food and leisure annoy and offend them. even his sleep and dreams bring him new materials for anxious fear; and death, his refuge from every other ill, presents only the dread of endless and innumerable woes. the wolf's attack on the timid flock is no worse than what superstition does to the anxious feelings of wretched mortals.

besides, consider, demea: this very society, by which we surmount those wild beasts, our natural enemies; what new enemies does it not raise to us? what woe and misery does it not occasion? man is the greatest enemy of man. oppression, injustice, contempt, contumely, violence, sedition, war, calumny, treachery, fraud; by these they mutually torment each other; and they would soon dissolve that society which they had formed, were it not for the dread of still greater ills, which must attend their separation.
besides, demea, think about this very society through which we get the upper hand over those wild beasts, our natural enemies: what new enemies it raises against us! what woe and misery it causes! man is the greatest enemy of man. oppression, injustice, contempt, disrespect, violence, sedition, war, slander, treachery, fraud men use these to torment one another, and they would soon dissolve the society they had formed if they weren't afraid that even greater ills would come from their doing so.

but though these external insults, said demea, from animals, from men, from all the elements, which assault us, form a frightful catalogue of woes, they are nothing in comparison of those which arise within ourselves, from the distempered condition of our mind and body. how many lie under the lingering torment of diseases? hear the pathetic enumeration of the great poet.
these external injuries, said demea, that we suffer from animals, from men, and from all the elements, do indeed form a frightful catalogue of woes; but they are nothing in comparison to the ones that arise within ourselves from the illnesses of our mind and body. how many people lie under the lingering torment of diseases? hear the pathetic list of the great poet.

intestine stone and ulcer, colic-pangs, demoniac frenzy, moping melancholy, and moon-struck madness, pining atrophy, marasmus, and wide-wasting pestilence. dire was the tossing, deep the groans: despair tended the sick, busiest from couch to couch. and over them triumphant death his dart shook: but delay'd to strike, though oft invok'd with vows, as their chief good and final hope.
intestine stone and ulcer, colic-pangs, demoniac frenzy, moping melancholy, and moon-struck madness, pining atrophy,

the disorders of the mind, continued demea, though more secret, are not perhaps less dismal and vexatious. remorse, shame, anguish, rage, disappointment, anxiety, fear, dejection, despair; who has ever passed through life without cruel inroads from these tormentors? how many have scarcely ever felt any better sensations? labour and poverty, so abhorred by every one, are the certain lot of the far greater number; and those few privileged persons, who enjoy ease and opulence, never reach contentment or true felicity. all the goods of life united would not make a very happy man; but all the ills united would make a wretch indeed; and any one of them almost (and who can be free from every one?) nay often the absence of one good (and who can possess all?) is sufficient to render life ineligible.
and over them triumphant death his dart shook: but delay'd to strike, though oft invok'd with vows, as their chief good and final hope. (milton, paradise lost 11) the disorders of the mind, continued demea, though they are more secret may be no less dismal and vexatious. remorse, shame, anguish, rage, disappointment, anxiety, fear, dejection, despair; who has ever passed through life without cruel attacks from these tormentors? many people have scarcely ever felt any better sensations than those! labour and poverty, so hated by everyone, are the certain fate of the majority, and the privileged few who enjoy leisure and wealth never reach contentment or true happiness. all the goods of life put together would not make a very happy man; but all the ills together would make a wretch indeed! life can indeed be made unsatisfactory by almost any one of the ills (and who can be free from every one? ), or indeed by the lack of any one good (and who can possess all? ).

were a stranger to drop on a sudden into this world, i would show him, as a specimen of its ills, a hospital full of diseases, a prison crowded with malefactors and debtors, a field of battle strewed with carcasses, a fleet foundering in the ocean, a nation languishing under tyranny, famine, or pestilence. to turn the gay side of life to him, and give him a notion of its pleasures; whither should i conduct him? to a ball, to an opera, to court? he might justly think, that i was only showing him a diversity of distress and sorrow.
if an alien suddenly arrived in this world, i would show him, as a specimen of its ills, a hospital full of diseases, a prison crowded with criminals and debtors, a field of battle with corpses all over it, a fleet of ships sinking in the ocean, a nation suffering under tyranny, famine, or plague. to turn the cheerful side of life to him and give him a notion of its pleasures, where should i take him? to a ball, to an opera, to court? he might reasonably think that i was only showing him other kinds of distress and sorrow.

there is no evading such striking instances, said philo, but by apologies, which still further aggravate the charge. why have all men, i ask, in all ages, complained incessantly of the miseries of life?... they have no just reason, says one: these complaints proceed only from their discontented, repining, anxious disposition...and can there possibly, i reply, be a more certain foundation of misery, than such a wretched temper?
there is no way to escape such striking instances, said philo, except by explaining them away and that makes the indictment even more severe. why, i ask, have all men in all ages complained incessantly of the miseries of life? someone replies: they have no good reason: they complain only because they are disposed to be discontented, regretful, anxious. i reply: what greater guarantee of misery could there be than to have such a wretched temperament?

but if they were really as unhappy as they pretend, says my antagonist, why do they remain in life?...
but if they were really as unhappy as they claim, says my antagonist, why do they stay alive?

not satisfied with life, afraid of death.
not satisfied with life, afraid of death.

this is the secret chain, say i, that holds us. we are terrified, not bribed to the continuance of our existence.
this is the secret chain that holds us, i reply. we are terrified, not bribed, into continuing our existence.

it is only a false delicacy, he may insist, which a few refined spirits indulge, and which has spread these complaints among the whole race of mankind. and what is this delicacy, i ask, which you blame? is it any thing but a greater sensibility to all the pleasures and pains of life? and if the man of a delicate, refined temper, by being so much more alive than the rest of the world, is only so much more unhappy, what judgement must we form in general of human life?
it is only a false delicacy, he may insist, which a few refined spirits permit themselves, and which has spread these complaints among the whole race of mankind. and what is this delicacy, i ask, which you blame? isn't it just a greater awareness of all the pleasures and pains of life? and if the man of a delicate, refined cast of mind, by being so much more alive than the rest of the world, is only made so much more unhappy, what conclusion should we reach about human life in general?

let men remain at rest, says our adversary, and they will be easy. they are willing artificers of their own misery. no! reply i: an anxious languor follows their repose; disappointment, vexation, trouble, their activity and ambition.
if men remained at rest, says our adversary, they would be at ease. through all their busy, ambitious activity they are willing makers of their own misery. no! i reply: leisure makes them anxious and slack. not that it would do any good for them to give up leisure, for activity and ambition bring disappointment, vexation, and trouble.

i can observe something like what you mention in some others, replied cleanthes: but i confess i feel little or nothing of it in myself, and hope that it is not so common as you represent it.
i can see something like what you describe in some others, replied cleanthes: but i confess that i feel little or nothing of it in myself, and i hope it isn't as common as you make it out to be.

if you feel not human misery yourself, cried demea, i congratulate you on so happy a singularity. others, seemingly the most prosperous, have not been ashamed to vent their complaints in the most melancholy strains. let us attend to the great, the fortunate emperor, charles v, when, tired with human grandeur, he resigned all his extensive dominions into the hands of his son. in the last harangue which he made on that memorable occasion, he publicly avowed, that the greatest prosperities which he had ever enjoyed, had been mixed with so many adversities, that he might truly say he had never enjoyed any satisfaction or contentment. but did the retired life, in which he sought for shelter, afford him any greater happiness? if we may credit his son's account, his repentance commenced the very day of his resignation.
if you don't feel human misery yourself, exclaimed demea, i congratulate you on your happy uniqueness! others, seemingly the most prosperous, haven't been ashamed to give voice to their complaints in the saddest tones. let us attend to the great, the fortunate emperor charles v when, tired with human grandeur, he resigned all his extensive dominions into the hands of his son. in the last speech he made on that memorable occasion, he publicly testified that the greatest prosperities he had ever enjoyed had been mixed with so many adversities that he could truly say that he had never enjoyed any satisfaction or contentment. but did the retired life in which he hoped to shelter give him any greater happiness? if we can believe his son's account, he started to regret his abdication on the very day he abdicated.

cicero's fortune, from small beginnings, rose to the greatest lustre and renown; yet what pathetic complaints of the ills of life do his familiar letters, as well as philosophical discourses, contain? and suitably to his own experience, he introduces cato, the great, the fortunate cato, protesting in his old age, that had he a new life in his offer, he would reject the present.
cicero's fortune rose from small beginnings to the greatest glory and fame; yet his letters to friends as well as his philosophical discourses contain ever so many pathetic complaints about the ills of life. and suitably to his own experience, he introduces cato the great, the fortunate cato protesting in his old age that if a new life were his for the asking, he would turn it down.

ask yourself, ask any of your acquaintance, whether they would live over again the last ten or twenty years of their life. no! but the next twenty, they say, will be better:
ask yourself, ask anyone you know, whether they would be willing to live over again the last ten or twenty years of their lives. no! but the next twenty, they say, will be better. human misery is so great that it reconciles even contradictions! and so people eventually come to complain about the shortness of life and, in the same breath, complaining of its pointlessness and sorrow.

and is it possible, cleanthes, said philo, that after all these reflections, and infinitely more, which might be suggested, you can still persevere in your anthropomorphism, and assert the moral attributes of the deity, his justice, benevolence, mercy, and rectitude, to be of the same nature with these virtues in human creatures? his power we allow is infinite: whatever he wills is executed: but neither man nor any other animal is happy: therefore he does not will their happiness. his wisdom is infinite: he is never mistaken in choosing the means to any end: but the course of nature tends not to human or animal felicity: therefore it is not established for that purpose. through the whole compass of human knowledge, there are no inferences more certain and infallible than these. in what respect, then, do his benevolence and mercy resemble the benevolence and mercy of men?
and is it possible, cleanthes, said philo, that after all these reflections, and countless others that might be suggested, you still stick to your anthropomorphism, and assert that the moral attributes of god his justice, benevolence, mercy, and uprightness are of the same nature as these virtues in human creatures? we grant that his power is infinite: whatever he wills to happen does happen. but neither man nor any other animal is happy; therefore god doesn't will their happiness. his knowledge is infinite: he is never mistaken in his choice of means to any end. but the course of nature doesn't lead to human or animal happiness; therefore nature isn't established for that purpose. through the whole range of human knowledge, there are no inferences more certain and infallible than these. well, then, in what respect do his benevolence and mercy resemble the benevolence and mercy of men?

epicurus's old questions are yet unanswered. is he willing to prevent evil, but not able? then is he impotent. is he able, but not willing? then is he malevolent. is he both able and willing? whence then is evil?
epicurus's old questions have still not been answered. is he willing to prevent evil, but not able? then he is impotent. is he able, but not willing? then he is malevolent. is he both able and willing? then where does evil come from?

you ascribe, cleanthes (and i believe justly), a purpose and intention to nature. but what, i beseech you, is the object of that curious artifice and machinery, which she has displayed in all animals? the preservation alone of individuals, and propagation of the species. it seems enough for her purpose, if such a rank be barely upheld in the universe, without any care or concern for the happiness of the members that compose it. no resource for this purpose: no machinery, in order merely to give pleasure or ease: no fund of pure joy and contentment: no indulgence, without some want or necessity accompanying it. at least, the few phenomena of this nature are overbalanced by opposite phenomena of still greater importance.
you ascribe a purpose and intention to nature, cleanthes, and i think you are right about that. but what, i ask you, is the aim of all the intricately designed machinery that nature has displayed in all animals? here is my answer to that. the aim is simply the preservation of individuals, and the continuance of the species. it seems enough for nature's purpose if the species is merely enabled to stay in existence, without any care or concern for the happiness of its individual members. no means for this are provided, no machinery aimed purely at giving pleasure or ease, no store of pure joy and contentment, no gratification without some lack or need to go with it. or perhaps not quite none, but at least the few phenomena of this nature are outweighed by opposite phenomena of greater importance.

our sense of music, harmony, and indeed beauty of all kinds, gives satisfaction, without being absolutely necessary to the preservation and propagation of the species. but what racking pains, on the other hand, arise from gouts, gravels, megrims, toothaches, rheumatisms, where the injury to the animal machinery is either small or incurable? mirth, laughter, play, frolic, seem gratuitous satisfactions, which have no further tendency: spleen, melancholy, discontent, superstition, are pains of the same nature. how then does the divine benevolence display itself, in the sense of you anthropomorphites? none but we mystics, as you were pleased to call us, can account for this strange mixture of phenomena, by deriving it from attributes, infinitely perfect, but incomprehensible.
our sense of music, harmony, and indeed beauty of all kinds gives satisfaction without being absolutely necessary to the preservation and propagation of the species. but contrast that with the racking pains that arise from gouts, gravels, migraines, toothaches, rheumatisms, where the injury to the animal machinery is either small so that no pain-signal is needed or incurable so that no pain-signal is useful. joy, laughter, play, frolic, seem to be gratuitous satisfactions that don't lead to anything further; and spleen, melancholy, discontent, superstition, are pains that also lead nowhere. how then does god's benevolence display itself according to you anthropomorphites? it is only we mystics (as you were pleased to call us) who can account for this strange mixture of phenomena, by deriving it from divine attributes that are infinitely perfect but incomprehensible.

and have you at last, said cleanthes smiling, betrayed your intentions, philo? your long agreement with demea did indeed a little surprise me; but i find you were all the while erecting a concealed battery against me. and i must confess, that you have now fallen upon a subject worthy of your noble spirit of opposition and controversy. if you can make out the present point, and prove mankind to be unhappy or corrupted, there is an end at once of all religion. for to what purpose establish the natural attributes of the deity, while the moral are still doubtful and uncertain?
at last, philo, said cleanthes with a smile, you have let us see what you have been up to! your long agreement with demea surprised me a little, but now i see that all along you were preparing to train your guns on me. and i must admit that you have now come to a subject that is worthy of your notable spirit of opposition and controversy. if you can make good on your present point, and prove mankind to be unhappy or corrupted, there is an immediate end to all religion. for what is the point of establishing the natural attributes of god while his moral attributes are still doubtful and uncertain?

you take umbrage very easily, replied demea, at opinions the most innocent, and the most generally received, even amongst the religious and devout themselves: and nothing can be more surprising than to find a topic like this, concerning the wickedness and misery of man, charged with no less than atheism and profaneness. have not all pious divines and preachers, who have indulged their rhetoric on so fertile a subject; have they not easily, i say, given a solution of any difficulties which may attend it? this world is but a point in comparison of the universe; this life but a moment in comparison of eternity. the present evil phenomena, therefore, are rectified in other regions, and in some future period of existence. and the eyes of men, being then opened to larger views of things, see the whole connection of general laws; and trace with adoration, the benevolence and rectitude of the deity, through all the mazes and intricacies of his providence.
you're very quick to object, replied demea, to innocent opinions that are the most widely accepted, even among religious and devout people. i'm immensely surprised to find this theme of the wickedness and misery of man being charged with, of all things, atheism and profaneness. haven't all pious divines and preachers who have lavished their rhetoric on this rich topic given a solution for any difficulties that may come with it? this world is a mere point in comparison with the universe; this life is a mere moment in comparison with eternity. the present evil phenomena, therefore, are set right in other regions and at some future time. and when that happens the eyes of men, being then opened to broader views of things, will see the whole connection of general laws, and with admiring wonder trace god's benevolence and justice through all the mazes and intricacies of his providence.

no! replied cleanthes, no! these arbitrary suppositions can never be admitted, contrary to matter of fact, visible and uncontroverted. whence can any cause be known but from its known effects? whence can any hypothesis be proved but from the apparent phenomena? to establish one hypothesis upon another, is building entirely in the air; and the utmost we ever attain, by these conjectures and fictions, is to ascertain the bare possibility of our opinion; but never can we, upon such terms, establish its reality.
no! replied cleanthes, no! these arbitrary suppositions can never be admitted; they are contrary to visible and unchallenged facts. how can any cause be known except from its known effects? how can any hypothesis be proved except from the experienced phenomena? to base one hypothesis on another is to build entirely in the air; and the most we ever achieve through these conjectures and fictions is to show that our opinion is possible; we can never in this way establish that it is true.

the only method of supporting divine benevolence, and it is what i willingly embrace, is to deny absolutely the misery and wickedness of man. your representations are exaggerated; your melancholy views mostly fictitious; your inferences contrary to fact and experience. health is more common than sickness; pleasure than pain; happiness than misery. and for one vexation which we meet with, we attain, upon computation, a hundred enjoyments.
the only way to support divine benevolence and it is what i willingly accept is to deny absolutely the misery and wickedness of man. your pictures of the human condition are exaggerated; your melancholy views are mostly fictitious; your conclusions are contrary to fact and experience. health is more common than sickness; pleasure than pain; happiness than misery. i calculate that for each vexation that we meet with we get a hundred enjoyments.

admitting your position, replied philo, which yet is extremely doubtful, you must at the same time allow, that if pain be less frequent than pleasure, it is infinitely more violent and durable. one hour of it is often able to outweigh a day, a week, a month of our common insipid enjoyments; and how many days, weeks, and months, are passed by several in the most acute torments? pleasure, scarcely in one instance, is ever able to reach ecstasy and rapture; and in no one instance can it continue for any time at its highest pitch and altitude. the spirits evaporate, the nerves relax, the fabric is disordered, and the enjoyment quickly degenerates into fatigue and uneasiness. but pain often, good god, how often! rises to torture and agony; and the longer it continues, it becomes still more genuine agony and torture. patience is exhausted, courage languishes, melancholy seizes us, and nothing terminates our misery but the removal of its cause, or another event, which is the sole cure of all evil, but which, from our natural folly, we regard with still greater horror and consternation.
your position is extremely doubtful, replied philo, but even if we allow it you must at the same time admit that if pain is less frequent than pleasure it is infinitely more violent and lasting. one hour of pain is often able to outweigh a day, a week, a month of our ordinary tepid enjoyments; and some people pass days, weeks, and months in the most acute torments! pleasure hardly ever rises to the height of ecstasy and rapture; and it can never continue for any time at its highest pitch and altitude. the spirits evaporate, the nerves relax, the body is out of order, and the enjoyment quickly degenerates into fatigue and uneasiness. but pain often good god, how often! rises to torture and agony; and the longer it continues the more thoroughly it becomes genuine agony and torture. patience is exhausted, courage fades, melancholy seizes us, and nothing puts an end to our misery except the removal of its cause or another event that is the sole cure of all evil though our natural foolishness leads us to regard it with still greater horror and consternation.

but not to insist upon these topics, continued philo, though most obvious, certain, and important; i must use the freedom to admonish you, cleanthes, that you have put the controversy upon a most dangerous issue, and are unawares introducing a total scepticism into the most essential articles of natural and revealed theology. what! no method of fixing a just foundation for religion, unless we allow the happiness of human life, and maintain a continued existence even in this world, with all our present pains, infirmities, vexations, and follies, to be eligible and desirable! but this is contrary to every one's feeling and experience: it is contrary to an authority so established as nothing can subvert. no decisive proofs can ever be produced against this authority; nor is it possible for you to compute, estimate, and compare, all the pains and all the pleasures in the lives of all men and of all animals: and thus, by your resting the whole system of religion on a point, which, from its very nature, must for ever be uncertain, you tacitly confess, that that system is equally uncertain.
all this is obvious, certain, and important, continued philo, but i shan't go on about it. i do take the opportunity to warn you, cleanthes, that you have taken your stand on most dangerous ground, and without realizing it have introduced a total scepticism into the most essential articles of natural and revealed theology. what! no way to give religion a sound basis unless we allow the happiness of human life, and maintain that a continued existence even in this world with all our actual pains, infirmities, vexations, and follies is satisfactory and desirable! this is contrary to everyone's feeling and experience; which means that it is contrary to an authority so well established that nothing can undercut it. no decisive proofs can ever be produced against this authority; nor is it possible for you to compute, estimate, and compare all the pains and all the pleasures in the lives of all men and of all animals; and so when you rest the whole system of religion on a claim which from its very nature must for ever be uncertain, you tacitly admit that the system is equally uncertain.

but allowing you what never will be believed, at least what you never possibly can prove, that animal, or at least human happiness, in this life, exceeds its misery, you have yet done nothing: for this is not, by any means, what we expect from infinite power, infinite wisdom, and infinite goodness. why is there any misery at all in the world? not by chance surely. from some cause then. is it from the intention of the deity? but he is perfectly benevolent. is it contrary to his intention? but he is almighty. nothing can shake the solidity of this reasoning, so short, so clear, so decisive; except we assert, that these subjects exceed all human capacity, and that our common measures of truth and falsehood are not applicable to them; a topic which i have all along insisted on, but which you have, from the beginning, rejected with scorn and indignation.
animal happiness, or at least human happiness, in this life exceeds its misery no-one will ever believe this, or at any rate you'll never be able to prove it. but even if we grant it to you, your argument has still achieved nothing; for this is far from what we expect from infinite power, infinite wisdom, and infinite goodness. why is there any misery at all in the world? not by chance, surely. from some cause, then. is it from the intention of god? but he is perfectly benevolent. is it contrary to his intention? but he is almighty. nothing can shake the solidity of this reasoning, so short, so clear, so decisive unless we say that these subjects exceed all human capacity, and that our common measures of truth and falsehood are not applicable to them; a thesis i have all along insisted on, but which you have from the outset rejected with scorn and indignation.

but i will be contented to retire still from this entrenchment, for i deny that you can ever force me in it. i will allow, that pain or misery in man is compatible with infinite power and goodness in the deity, even in your sense of these attributes: what are you advanced by all these concessions? a mere possible compatibility is not sufficient. you must prove these pure, unmixed, and uncontrollable attributes from the present mixed and confused phenomena, and from these alone. a hopeful undertaking! were the phenomena ever so pure and unmixed, yet being finite, they would be insufficient for that purpose. how much more, where they are also so jarring and discordant!
but i will be contented to shift back from this position doing this voluntarily, for i deny that you can ever force me out of it. i will allow for purposes of argument that pain or misery in man is compatible with infinite power and goodness in god, even when these attributes are understood in your way: what help do all these concessions give to your position? a mere possible compatibility is not sufficient. you must prove the existence of these pure, unmixed, and uncontrollable attributes from the present mixed and confused phenomena, and from these alone. a hopeful undertaking! even if the phenomena were ever so pure and unmixed, because they are finite they would be insufficient for your purpose. how much more inadequate when they are also so jarring and discordant!

here, cleanthes, i find myself at ease in my argument. here i triumph. formerly, when we argued concerning the natural attributes of intelligence and design, i needed all my sceptical and metaphysical subtlety to elude your grasp. in many views of the universe, and of its parts, particularly the latter, the beauty and fitness of final causes strike us with such irresistible force, that all objections appear (what i believe they really are) mere cavils and sophisms; nor can we then imagine how it was ever possible for us to repose any weight on them. but there is no view of human life, or of the condition of mankind, from which, without the greatest violence, we can infer the moral attributes, or learn that infinite benevolence, conjoined with infinite power and infinite wisdom, which we must discover by the eyes of faith alone. it is your turn now to tug the labouring oar, and to support your philosophical subtleties against the dictates of plain reason and experience.
here, cleanthes, i find i can relax in my argument. here i triumph! when we argued earlier about the natural attributes of intelligence and design, i needed all my sceptical and metaphysical subtlety to escape your grasp. in many views of the universe and of its parts, particularly its parts, the beauty and fitness of final causes strike us with such irresistible force that all objections seem to be (as i think they really are) mere fault-finding and trickery; and then we can't imagine how we could ever give weight to them. but there is no view of human life or of the condition of mankind from which we can smoothly infer the moral attributes of god, or learn about that infinite benevolence, conjoined with infinite power and infinite wisdom, which we must discover by the eyes of faith alone. but now the tables are turned! it is now your turn to tug the labouring oar, and to defend your philosophical subtleties against the dictates of plain reason and experience.

part 11
it was maintained by dr. king and a few others, before leibniz, but not by any as famous as that german philosopher. part 11

i scruple not to allow, said cleanthes, that i have been apt to suspect the frequent repetition of the word infinite, which we meet with in all theological writers, to savour more of panegyric than of philosophy; and that any purposes of reasoning, and even of religion, would be better served, were we to rest contented with more accurate and more moderate expressions. the terms, admirable, excellent, superlatively great, wise, and holy; these sufficiently fill the imaginations of men; and any thing beyond, besides that it leads into absurdities, has no influence on the affections or sentiments. thus, in the present subject, if we abandon all human analogy, as seems your intention, demea, i am afraid we abandon all religion, and retain no conception of the great object of our adoration. if we preserve human analogy, we must for ever find it impossible to reconcile any mixture of evil in the universe with infinite attributes; much less can we ever prove the latter from the former. but supposing the author of nature to be finitely perfect, though far exceeding mankind, a satisfactory account may then be given of natural and moral evil, and every untoward phenomenon be explained and adjusted. a less evil may then be chosen, in order to avoid a greater; inconveniences be submitted to, in order to reach a desirable end; and in a word, benevolence, regulated by wisdom, and limited by necessity, may produce just such a world as the present. you, philo, who are so prompt at starting views, and reflections, and analogies, i would gladly hear, at length, without interruption, your opinion of this new theory; and if it deserve our attention, we may afterwards, at more leisure, reduce it into form.
i don't mind admitting, said cleanthes, that i have been inclined to suspect that the frequent repetition of the word infinite, which we meet with in all theological writers, has the flavour of praise more than of philosophy; and that any purposes of reasoning, and any purposes even of religion, would be better served if we contented ourselves with more accurate and moderate expressions. the terms admirable, excellent, superlatively great, wise, and holy these sufficiently fill the imaginations of men, and anything that goes further than they do has two drawbacks: it leads into absurdities, and it has no influence on our feelings or beliefs. the way someone feels about a god who is infinitely great is exactly the way he would feel about a god who is superlatively great. thus in our present subject if we abandon all human analogy, as you seem to want, demea, i am afraid we abandon all religion and are left with no conception of god, the great object of our admiring wonder. if we keep the human analogy while also staying with infinite, we'll never be able to reconcile any mixture of evil in the universe with infinite attributes; much less can we ever infer the attributes from the facts about what evil there is in the universe. but if we suppose the author of nature to be only finitely perfect, though far more perfect than mankind, we can give a satisfactory account of natural and of moral evil, and every bad phenomenon can be explained and harmonized with the rest. a lesser evil may then be chosen in order to avoid a greater; inconveniences may be put up with in order to reach a desirable end; and, in brief, benevolence, guided by wisdom, and limited by necessity can produce just such a world as the one we have. you, philo, who are so prompt at launching views and reflections and analogies, i would be glad to hear at length and without interruption your opinion of this new theory of mine. if it turns out to deserve our attention, we can later take our time about shaping it up and filling in details.

my sentiments, replied philo, are not worth being made a mystery of; and therefore, without any ceremony, i shall deliver what occurs to me with regard to the present subject. it must, i think, be allowed, that if a very limited intelligence, whom we shall suppose utterly unacquainted with the universe, were assured, that it were the production of a very good, wise, and powerful being, however finite, he would, from his conjectures, form beforehand a different notion of it from what we find it to be by experience; nor would he ever imagine, merely from these attributes of the cause, of which he is informed, that the effect could be so full of vice and misery and disorder, as it appears in this life. supposing now, that this person were brought into the world, still assured that it was the workmanship of such a sublime and benevolent being; he might, perhaps, be surprised at the disappointment; but would never retract his former belief, if founded on any very solid argument; since such a limited intelligence must be sensible of his own blindness and ignorance, and must allow, that there may be many solutions of those phenomena, which will for ever escape his comprehension. but supposing, which is the real case with regard to man, that this creature is not antecedently convinced of a supreme intelligence, benevolent, and powerful, but is left to gather such a belief from the appearances of things; this entirely alters the case, nor will he ever find any reason for such a conclusion. he may be fully convinced of the narrow limits of his understanding; but this will not help him in forming an inference concerning the goodness of superior powers, since he must form that inference from what he knows, not from what he is ignorant of. the more you exaggerate his weakness and ignorance, the more diffident you render him, and give him the greater suspicion that such subjects are beyond the reach of his faculties. you are obliged, therefore, to reason with him merely from the known phenomena, and to drop every arbitrary supposition or conjecture.
my opinions, replied philo, aren't worth being made a mystery of; so without more ado i'll tell you what occurs to me regarding this present subject. it must be admitted, i think, that if a being who had very limited intelligence and was utterly unacquainted with our universe were assured that it is the product of a being who, though finite, is very good, wise, and powerful, this would lead him beforehand to expect something different from what our experience shows the universe to be like; he would never imagine, merely from being informed that the cause is very good, wise, and powerful that the effect could be as full of vice and misery and disorder as it appears to be in this life. supposing now that this person were brought into our world, still sure that it was the workmanship of that sublime and benevolent being; he might be surprised at the discrepancy with what he had expected; but he wouldn't retract his former belief about the cause of the universe if that was founded on any very solid argument; for a person with such a limited intelligence must be aware of his own blindness and ignorance, and must admit that these phenomena of vice, misery etc. may have explanations that he'll never be able to understand. but suppose that this creature is not as we are not convinced in advance of a supreme intelligence, benevolent and powerful, but is left to infer such a belief from the appearances of things; this entirely alters the case, and he will never find any reason for such a conclusion. he may be fully convinced of the narrow limits of his understanding; but this won't help him to make an inference concerning the goodness of superior powers, because he has to make that inference from what he knows, not from what he is ignorant of. the more you exaggerate his weakness and ignorance, the more cautious you make him, and the more you make him suspect that such subjects are beyond the reach of his faculties. you are obliged, therefore, to reason with him merely from the known phenomena, and to drop every arbitrary supposition or conjecture.

did i show you a house or palace, where there was not one apartment convenient or agreeable; where the windows, doors, fires, passages, stairs, and the whole economy of the building, were the source of noise, confusion, fatigue, darkness, and the extremes of heat and cold; you would certainly blame the contrivance, without any further examination. the architect would in vain display his subtlety, and prove to you, that if this door or that window were altered, greater ills would ensue. what he says may be strictly true: the alteration of one particular, while the other parts of the building remain, may only augment the inconveniences. but still you would assert in general, that, if the architect had had skill and good intentions, he might have formed such a plan of the whole, and might have adjusted the parts in such a manner, as would have remedied all or most of these inconveniences. his ignorance, or even your own ignorance of such a plan, will never convince you of the impossibility of it. if you find any inconveniences and deformities in the building, you will always, without entering into any detail, condemn the architect.
if i showed you a house or palace where there wasn't one convenient or agreeable apartment, where the windows, doors, fireplaces, passages, stairs, and the whole arrangement of the building were the source of noise, confusion, fatigue, darkness, and the extremes of heat and cold, you would certainly blame the planning of the building without any further examination. it would be no use for the architect to display his subtlety, and to prove to you that if this door or that window were altered something worse would follow. what he says may be strictly true: it may be that it would only make things worse to alter one detail while leaving the other parts of the building unchanged. but you would still say in general that if the architect had had skill and good intentions he could have planned the whole building, and inter-related its parts, in such a way as to remedy all or most of these inconveniences. his ignorance of such a plan even your own ignorance of such a plan will never convince you that it is impossible. if you find any inconveniences and defects in the building, you will always straight off condemn the architect.

in short, i repeat the question: is the world, considered in general, and as it appears to us in this life, different from what a man, or such a limited being, would, beforehand, expect from a very powerful, wise, and benevolent deity? it must be strange prejudice to assert the contrary. and from thence i conclude, that however consistent the world may be, allowing certain suppositions and conjectures, with the idea of such a deity, it can never afford us an inference concerning his existence. the consistence is not absolutely denied, only the inference. conjectures, especially where infinity is excluded from the divine attributes, may perhaps be sufficient to prove a consistence, but can never be foundations for any inference.
in short, i repeat the question: is the world, considered over-all and as it appears to us in this life, different from what a limited being like a man would expect beforehand from a very powerful, wise, and benevolent god? it must be a strange prejudice to assert that it isn't. and from this i conclude that however consistent the world may be (on certain assumptions and with allowances made) with the idea of such a god, it can never provide us with an inference to his existence. the consistency is not absolutely denied, only the inference. conjectures, especially when infinity is excluded from god's attributes, may perhaps be sufficient to prove a consistency, but they can never be foundations for any inference.

there seem to be four circumstances, on which depend all, or the greatest part of the ills, that molest sensible creatures; and it is not impossible but all these circumstances may be necessary and unavoidable. we know so little beyond common life, or even of common life, that, with regard to the economy of a universe, there is no conjecture, however wild, which may not be just; nor any one, however plausible, which may not be erroneous. all that belongs to human understanding, in this deep ignorance and obscurity, is to be sceptical, or at least cautious, and not to admit of any hypothesis whatever, much less of any which is supported by no appearance of probability. now, this i assert to be the case with regard to all the causes of evil, and the circumstances on which it depends. none of them appear to human reason in the least degree necessary or unavoidable; nor can we suppose them such, without the utmost license of imagination.
there seem to be four circumstances on which depend all or most of the troubles that beset conscious creatures; and it isn't impossible that all these circumstances are necessary and unavoidable. we know so little beyond common life we know indeed so little of common life that when it comes to the way a universe is arranged any conjecture, however wild, may be correct so far as we can tell to the contrary; and any conjecture, however plausible, may be erroneous so far as we can tell to the contrary. the human understanding, in this deep ignorance and obscurity, ought to be sceptical, or at least cautious, and oughtn't to accept any hypothesis whatever, especially ones that aren't supported by any appearance of probability. i claim that this is the case with regard to all the causes of evil, and the circumstances on which it depends. none of them appears to human reason to be in the slightest necessary or unavoidable; and we can't suppose them to be so without letting our imaginations run wild. (1) the first circumstance that introduces evil is the device or arrangement of the animal creation by which pains as well as pleasures are employed to rouse creatures to action, and make them alert in the great work of selfpreservation. now it seems to human understanding that pleasure alone, in its various levels of intensity, would suffice for this purpose. it could have been like this:

but a capacity of pain would not alone produce pain, were it not for the second circumstance, viz. the conducting of the world by general laws; and this seems nowise necessary to a very perfect being. it is true, if everything were conducted by particular volitions, the course of nature would be perpetually broken, and no man could employ his reason in the conduct of life. but might not other particular volitions remedy this inconvenience? in short, might not the deity exterminate all ill, wherever it were to be found; and produce all good, without any preparation, or long progress of causes and effects?
men pursue pleasure as eagerly as they avoid pain or, anyway, they could have been so constituted that this was true of them. so it seems clearly possible to carry on the business of life without any pain. why then is any animal ever subjected to such a sensation? if animals can be free from it for an hour, they could be free from it all the time; and their being subject to pain is a positive fact about them, not a mere absence of something it might have been impossible to provide: it required a particular arrangement of their organs to produce pain, just as it did to endow them with sight, hearing, or any of the senses. shall we conjecture without any appearance of reason for it that such an arrangement was necessary? and shall we build on that conjecture as we would on the most certain truth? (2) but a capacity for pain would not of itself produce pain if it weren't for something else, namely the world's being governed by general laws; and this seems to be in no way necessary for a very perfect being. it is true that if each thing that happens were caused by an individual volition on god's part, the course of nature would be perpetually broken, there would be no dependable regularities, and so no man could employ his reason in the conduct of life. but if some such volitions threatened to have that effect, mightn't other particular volitions remedy this inconvenience? in short, might not god exterminate all misfortune, wherever it was to be found, and make everything all good, through judiciously placed individual volitions, and thus without any preparation or long chains of causes and effects?

besides, we must consider, that, according to the present economy of the world, the course of nature, though supposed exactly regular, yet to us appears not so, and many events are uncertain, and many disappoint our expectations. health and sickness, calm and tempest, with an infinite number of other accidents, whose causes are unknown and variable, have a great influence both on the fortunes of particular persons and on the prosperity of public societies; and indeed all human life, in a manner, depends on such accidents. a being, therefore, who knows the secret springs of the universe, might easily, by particular volitions, turn all these accidents to the good of mankind, and render the whole world happy, without discovering himself in any operation. a fleet, whose purposes were salutary to society, might always meet with a fair wind. good princes enjoy sound health and long life. persons born to power and authority, be framed with good tempers and virtuous dispositions. a few such events as these, regularly and wisely conducted, would change the face of the world; and yet would no more seem to disturb the course of nature, or confound human conduct, than the present economy of things, where the causes are secret, and variable, and compounded. some small touches given to caligula's brain in his infancy, might have converted him into a trajan. one wave, a little higher than the rest, by burying caesar and his fortune in the bottom of the ocean, might have restored liberty to a considerable part of mankind. there may, for aught we know, be good reasons why providence interposes not in this manner; but they are unknown to us; and though the mere supposition, that such reasons exist, may be sufficient to save the conclusion concerning the divine attributes, yet surely it can never be sufficient to establish that conclusion.
besides, we should bear in mind that in the present arrangement of the world the course of nature, though supposed to be entirely regular, appears to us not to be so; many events are uncertain, and many disappoint our expectations. countless kinds of happenings whose causes are unknown and variable for example health and sickness, calm and tempest have a great influence both on the fortunes of particular persons and on the prosperity of whole communities; and indeed all human life depends in a way on such happenings. so a being who knows the secret workings of the universe might easily, by particular volitions, turn all these happenings to the good of mankind and make the whole world happy, without revealing himself in any operation. a fleet whose purposes were useful to society might always meet with a fair wind. good rulers might enjoy sound health and long life. persons born to power and authority might be endowed with good temperaments and virtuous dispositions. a few outcomes such as these, regularly and wisely brought about, would change the face of the world; and yet they would no more seem to disturb the course of nature or thwart human conduct than does the present arrangement of things where the causes are secret, and variable, and complex. some small touches given to caligula's brain in his infancy might have converted him into a trajan. one wave a little higher than the rest, by burying caesar and his fortune in the bottom of the ocean, might have restored liberty to a considerable part of mankind. there may, for all we know, be good reasons why providence doesn't intervene in this manner; but we don't know them; and though the mere supposition that such reasons exist may be sufficient to save the conclusion concerning the divine attributes from being refuted by the observed facts, it can surely never be sufficient to establish that conclusion.

if every thing in the universe be conducted by general laws, and if animals be rendered susceptible of pain, it scarcely seems possible but some ill must arise in the various shocks of matter, and the various concurrence and opposition of general laws; but this ill would be very rare, were it not for the third circumstance, which i proposed to mention, viz. the great frugality with which all powers and faculties are distributed to every particular being. so well adjusted are the organs and capacities of all animals, and so well fitted to their preservation, that, as far as history or tradition reaches, there appears not to be any single species which has yet been extinguished in the universe. every animal has the requisite endowments; but these endowments are bestowed with so scrupulous an economy, that any considerable diminution must entirely destroy the creature. wherever one power is increased, there is a proportional abatement in the others. animals which excel in swiftness are commonly defective in force. those which possess both are either imperfect in some of their senses, or are oppressed with the most craving wants. the human species, whose chief excellency is reason and sagacity, is of all others the most necessitous, and the most deficient in bodily advantages; without clothes, without arms, without food, without lodging, without any convenience of life, except what they owe to their own skill and industry. in short, nature seems to have formed an exact calculation of the necessities of her creatures; and, like a rigid master, has afforded them little more powers or endowments than what are strictly sufficient to supply those necessities. an indulgent parent would have bestowed a large stock, in order to guard against accidents, and secure the happiness and welfare of the creature in the most unfortunate concurrence of circumstances. every course of life would not have been so surrounded with precipices, that the least departure from the true path, by mistake or necessity, must involve us in misery and ruin. some reserve, some fund, would have been provided to ensure happiness; nor would the powers and the necessities have been adjusted with so rigid an economy. the author of nature is inconceivably powerful: his force is supposed great, if not altogether inexhaustible: nor is there any reason, as far as we can judge, to make him observe this strict frugality in his dealings with his creatures. it would have been better, were his power extremely limited, to have created fewer animals, and to have endowed these with more faculties for their happiness and preservation. a builder is never esteemed prudent, who undertakes a plan beyond what his stock will enable him to finish.
if (2) everything in the universe is governed by general laws, and if (1) animals are made capable of pain, it seems almost inevitable that some misfortune will arise in the various collisions of matter, and the various agreements and clashes between general laws; but such misfortune would be very rare if it weren't for (3)  the third of the four factors that i proposed to mention. it is the great frugality with which all powers and abilities are distributed to every particular being. the organs and capacities of all animals are so well organized and so well fitted to their preservation that judging by history and tradition there appears never yet to have been a species that was extinguished in the universe. every animal has the endowments it needs; but these endowments are given out with such careful economy giving each creature only the bare necessities for its survival that if anything considerable is taken away from them the creature is entirely destroyed. wherever one power is increased, there is a proportional lessening of the others. animals that excel in speed are commonly lacking in strength. those that have both are either imperfect in some of their senses or are oppressed with the most craving wants. the human species, whose chief excellence is reason and foresight, has more needs and fewer bodily advantages than any of the others: think of how humans would be situated if they were without clothes, without weapons, without food, without lodging, without any convenience of life except what they owe to their own skill and hard work. in short, nature seems to have calculated exactly what her creatures need, and like a stern employer has granted them little more than the powers or endowments that are strictly sufficient to meet those needs. an indulgent parent would have provided a great deal extra, so as to guard against unforeseen events and to secure the happiness and welfare of the creature in the worst crises. he would not have left us in a condition where every course of life is surrounded with precipices to such an extent that the least departure from the true path whether by mistake or by necessity is bound to involve us in misery and ruin. some reserve, some emergency fund, would have been provided to ensure happiness; and our powers and our needs wouldn't have been so strictly balanced against each other. the author of nature is inconceivably powerful; his force is supposed to be great, even if not limitless; and there's no reason we can find why he should be so strictly frugal in his dealings with his creatures. if his power is extremely limited, he'd have done better to create fewer animals, and to have endowed these with more means for being happy and staying alive. a builder is never regarded as prudent if he tackles a plan that he hasn't the materials to finish.

in order to cure most of the ills of human life, i require not that man should have the wings of the eagle, the swiftness of the stag, the force of the ox, the arms of the lion, the scales of the crocodile or rhinoceros; much less do i demand the sagacity of an angel or cherubim. i am contented to take an increase in one single power or faculty of his soul. let him be endowed with a greater propensity to industry and labour; a more vigorous spring and activity of mind; a more constant bent to business and application. let the whole species possess naturally an equal diligence with that which many individuals are able to attain by habit and reflection; and the most beneficial consequences, without any allay of ill, is the immediate and necessary result of this endowment. almost all the moral, as well as natural evils of human life, arise from idleness; and were our species, by the original constitution of their frame, exempt from this vice or infirmity, the perfect cultivation of land, the improvement of arts and manufactures, the exact execution of every office and duty, immediately follow; and men at once may fully reach that state of society, which is so imperfectly attained by the best regulated government. but as industry is a power, and the most valuable of any, nature seems determined, suitably to her usual maxims, to bestow it on men with a very sparing hand; and rather to punish him severely for his deficiency in it, than to reward him for his attainments. she has so contrived his frame, that nothing but the most violent necessity can oblige him to labour; and she employs all his other wants to overcome, at least in part, the want of diligence, and to endow him with some share of a faculty of which she has thought fit naturally to bereave him. here our demands may be allowed very humble, and therefore the more reasonable. if we required the endowments of superior penetration and judgement, of a more delicate taste of beauty, of a nicer sensibility to benevolence and friendship; we might be told, that we impiously pretend to break the order of nature; that we want to exalt ourselves into a higher rank of being; that the presents which we require, not being suitable to our state and condition, would only be pernicious to us. but it is hard; i dare to repeat it, it is hard, that being placed in a world so full of wants and necessities, where almost every being and element is either our foe or refuses its assistance ... we should also have our own temper to struggle with, and should be deprived of that faculty which can alone fence against these multiplied evils. the fourth circumstance, whence arises the misery and ill of the universe, is the inaccurate workmanship of all the springs and principles of the great machine of nature. it must be acknowledged, that there are few parts of the universe, which seem not to serve some purpose, and whose removal would not produce a visible defect and disorder in the whole. the parts hang all together; nor can one be touched without affecting the rest, in a greater or less degree. but at the same time, it must be observed, that none of these parts or principles, however useful, are so accurately adjusted, as to keep precisely within those bounds in which their utility consists; but they are, all of them, apt, on every occasion, to run into the one extreme or the other. one would imagine, that this grand production had not received the last hand of the maker; so little finished is every part, and so coarse are the strokes with which it is executed. thus, the winds are requisite to convey the vapours along the surface of the globe, and to assist men in navigation: but how oft, rising up to tempests and hurricanes, do they become pernicious? rains are necessary to nourish all the plants and animals of the earth: but how often are they defective? how often excessive? heat is requisite to all life and vegetation; but is not always found in the due proportion. on the mixture and secretion of the humours and juices of the body depend the health and prosperity of the animal: but the parts perform not regularly their proper function. what more useful than all the passions of the mind, ambition, vanity, love, anger? but how oft do they break their bounds, and cause the greatest convulsions in society? there is nothing so advantageous in the universe, but what frequently becomes pernicious, by its excess or defect; nor has nature guarded, with the requisite accuracy, against all disorder or confusion. the irregularity is never perhaps so great as to destroy any species; but is often sufficient to involve the individuals in ruin and misery.
in order to remedy most of the misfortunes of human life i don't require that man should have the wings of the eagle, the swiftness of the stag, the force of the ox, the arms of the lion, the scales of the crocodile or rhinoceros; much less do i demand the intelligence of an angel. i will settle for an increase in one single power or capacity of his mind: let him be endowed with a greater liking for work, a more vigorous bounce and activity of mind, a more constant tendency to get on with his business. if the whole species possessed naturally the same high level of diligence that many individuals cultivate in themselves, the immediate and necessary result of this endowment would be the most beneficial consequences, with no taint of anything bad. almost all the moral evils of human life, as well as its natural evils, arise from idleness; and if our species had been built so as to be inherently free of this vice or infirmity, the immediate result would have been the perfect cultivation of land, the improvement of arts and manufactures, the exact performance of every office and duty, and men would straight away have reached the state of society that as things are is only imperfectly achieved by the best regulated government. but as hard-workingness is a power, and indeed the most valuable of all the powers, nature seems to be determined to follow her usual policy and to bestow it on men with a very sparing hand; and to punish him severely for not having enough of it rather than to reward him for his achievements. she has built him in such a way that nothing but the strongest need can force him to work, and she exploits that fact in order to get him to work: she uses all his other wants to overcome, at least in part, his lack of diligence, thus endowing him through hardship and need with some share of a faculty that she has deprived him of naturally. here our demands can be agreed to be very humble, and thus all the more reasonable. if we required the endowments of sharper intellect and wiser judgment, of a more delicate taste for beauty, of more sensitive feelings of benevolence and friendship, we might be told that we were impiously claiming to break the order of nature, that we wanted to raise ourselves to a higher level of being, that the gifts that we ask for, not being suitable to our state and condition, would only bring us misery. but it is hard i dare to repeat it, it is hard that when we are placed in a world so full of wants and necessities, where almost every being and element is either our foe or refuses its assistance, we should also have our own temperament to struggle with, and should be deprived of the only faculty namely, an inclination for hard work that can protect us from these multiplied evils. (4) the fourth factor leading to the misery and misfortune of the universe is the inaccurate workmanship of all the workings and principles of the great machine of nature. it must be admitted that most parts of the universe seem to serve some purpose, and in most cases the removal of a part would produce a visible defect and disorder in the whole. the parts all hang together; and you can't change one without affecting the rest, more or less. but at the same time it must be observed that none of these parts or powers, however useful, are so accurately adjusted that they keep precisely within the limits of their usefulness; all of them are apt much of the time to run to one extreme or the other. this grand product, the universe, is so unfinished in every part, and is carried out with such coarse brush-strokes, that one would think that its maker hadn't yet put on its finishing touches. thus, winds are needed to blow away smoke and fog and noxious fumes, and to help men in navigation: but often they grow to being tempests and hurricanes, and then they become pernicious. rains are necessary to nourish all the plants and animals of the earth; but often there are droughts and often the rain is excessive. heat is needed for life and vegetation, but isn't always found at the right level. the health and prosperity of the animal depend on the making and mixing of the fluids and juices of its body, but the parts of these fluids don't dependably perform their proper function. the passions of the mind ambition, vanity, love, anger are extremely useful, but they often overflow their banks and cause the greatest convulsions in society. everything in the universe, however advantageous, frequently becomes pernicious through there being too much or too little of it; and nature has not guarded effectively against all disorder or confusion. the irregularity is perhaps never so great as to destroy any species, but is often sufficient to involve individuals in ruin and misery.

on the concurrence, then, of these four circumstances, does all or the greatest part of natural evil depend. were all living creatures incapable of pain, or were the world administered by particular volitions, evil never could have found access into the universe: and were animals endowed with a large stock of powers and faculties, beyond what strict necessity requires; or were the several springs and principles of the universe so accurately framed as to preserve always the just temperament and medium; there must have been very little ill in comparison of what we feel at present. what then shall we pronounce on this occasion? shall we say that these circumstances are not necessary, and that they might easily have been altered in the contrivance of the universe? this decision seems too presumptuous for creatures so blind and ignorant. let us be more modest in our conclusions. let us allow, that, if the goodness of the deity (i mean a goodness like the human) could be established on any tolerable reasons a priori, these phenomena, however untoward, would not be sufficient to subvert that principle; but might easily, in some unknown manner, be reconcilable to it. but let us still assert, that as this goodness is not antecedently established, but must be inferred from the phenomena, there can be no grounds for such an inference, while there are so many ills in the universe, and while these ills might so easily have been remedied, as far as human understanding can be allowed to judge on such a subject. i am sceptic enough to allow, that the bad appearances, notwithstanding all my reasonings, may be compatible with such attributes as you suppose; but surely they can never prove these attributes. such a conclusion cannot result from scepticism, but must arise from the phenomena, and from our confidence in the reasonings which we deduce from these phenomena.
there are the four factors on which all or most natural evil depends. if (1) all living creatures were incapable of feeling pain, or if (2) the world were governed by particular volitions, evil never could have found its way into the universe; and if (3) animals were endowed with a large stock of powers and faculties, beyond what they strictly need for survival, or if (4) the various springs and principles of the universe were so accurately devised as to preserve always the temperate middle level and not run to extremes, there would have been very little misfortune compared to what we feel at present. what then shall we say about all this? shall we say that the universe could easily have been designed so as to be different in these four respects? this decision seems too presumptuous for creatures as blind and ignorant as we are. let us be more modest in our conclusions. let us allow that if the goodness of god (i mean a goodness like human goodness) could be established by any respectable a priori argument, these phenomena, however unfortunate, wouldn't be sufficient to undercut that principle of god's goodness; for the phenomena might be easily reconcilable to it in some way we don't know about. but we should still maintain that as god's goodness is not antecedently established, and has to be inferred from the phenomena, there can be no grounds for such an inference when there are so many misfortunes in the universe, and while these misfortunes could as far as human understanding can be allowed to judge on such a subject easily have been remedied. i am sceptic enough to allow that the bad appearances, notwithstanding all my reasonings, may be compatible with such divine attributes as you suppose; but surely they can never prove these attributes. the conclusion that god is good cannot result from scepticism, but must arise from the phenomena and from our confidence in the reasonings through which we draw conclusions from these phenomena.

look round this universe. what an immense profusion of beings, animated and organised, sensible and active! you admire this prodigious variety and fecundity. but inspect a little more narrowly these living existences, the only beings worth regarding. how hostile and destructive to each other! how insufficient all of them for their own happiness! how contemptible or odious to the spectator! the whole presents nothing but the idea of a blind nature, impregnated by a great vivifying principle, and pouring forth from her lap, without discernment or parental care, her maimed and abortive children!
look around this universe. what an immense profusion of beings, animated and organized, conscious and active! you admire this prodigious variety and fruitfulness. but look a little more closely at these living things (the only ones worth thinking about). how hostile and destructive they are to each other! how far they all are from being able to achieve their own happiness! how contemptible or odious they are to the spectator! the whole picture is one of a blind nature impregnated by some powerful life-giving force and pouring forth from her lap, without discernment or parental care, her maimed and abortive children!

here the manichaean system occurs as a proper hypothesis to solve the difficulty: and no doubt, in some respects, it is very specious, and has more probability than the common hypothesis, by giving a plausible account of the strange mixture of good and ill which appears in life. but if we consider, on the other hand, the perfect uniformity and agreement of the parts of the universe, we shall not discover in it any marks of the combat of a malevolent with a benevolent being. there is indeed an opposition of pains and pleasures in the feelings of sensible creatures: but are not all the operations of nature carried on by an opposition of principles, of hot and cold, moist and dry, light and heavy? the true conclusion is, that the original source of all things is entirely indifferent to all these principles; and has no more regard to good above ill, than to heat above cold, or to drought above moisture, or to light above heavy.
here the manichaean system according to which the universe is governed by two fundamental forces, one good and the other bad comes to mind as a good hypothesis to solve the difficulty. no doubt it is in some respects very attractive, and its giving a plausible account of the strange mixture of good and ill that appears in life makes it more probable than the common hypothesis of a single benevolent god. but if on the other hand we think about the perfect uniformity and agreement of the parts of the universe, we shan't discover in it any signs of a malevolent being's battle against a benevolent one. there is indeed an opposition of pains and pleasures in the feelings of conscious creatures; but aren't all the operations of nature carried on by an opposition of forces, of hot and cold, moist and dry, light and heavy? the true conclusion is that the original source of all things is entirely indifferent to all these forces, and no more prefers good above evil than heat above cold, or drought above moisture, or light above heavy.

there may four hypotheses be framed concerning the first causes of the universe: that they are endowed with perfect goodness; that they have perfect malice; that they are opposite, and have both goodness and malice; that they have neither goodness nor malice. mixed phenomena can never prove the two former unmixed principles; and the uniformity and steadiness of general laws seem to oppose the third. the fourth, therefore, seems by far the most probable.
four hypotheses can be formed concerning the first causes of the universe: that they are endowed with perfect goodness; that they have perfect malice; that they are opposite, and have both goodness and malice; that they have neither goodness nor malice. mixed phenomena can never prove the two former unmixed principles; and the uniformity and steadiness of general laws seem to oppose the third. the fourth, therefore, seems by far the most probable that is, that the first causes of the universe are neutral with regard to good and bad.

what i have said concerning natural evil will apply to moral, with little or no variation; and we have no more reason to infer, that the rectitude of the supreme being resembles human rectitude, than that his benevolence resembles the human. nay, it will be thought, that we have still greater cause to exclude from him moral sentiments, such as we feel them; since moral evil, in the opinion of many, is much more predominant above moral good than natural evil above natural good.
what i have said about natural evil also applies with little or no change to moral evil: we have no more reason to infer that the uprightness of the supreme being resembles human uprightness than that his benevolence resembles human benevolence. indeed, it will be thought that we have more reason to exclude from him moral feelings such as ours, because many people think that moral evil predominates over moral good more than natural evil above natural good.

but even though this should not be allowed, and though the virtue which is in mankind should be acknowledged much superior to the vice, yet so long as there is any vice at all in the universe, it will very much puzzle you anthropomorphites, how to account for it. you must assign a cause for it, without having recourse to the first cause. but as every effect must have a cause, and that cause another, you must either carry on the progression in infinitum, or rest on that original principle, who is the ultimate cause of all things...
but even if this is rejected, and even if the virtue that mankind has is acknowledged to be much superior to the vice, still as long as there is any vice at all in the universe you anthropomorphites will be very puzzled over how to account for it. you must assign a cause for it, without bringing in the first cause. but every effect must have a cause, and that cause must have another, and so you must either carry on the sequence ad infinitum or bring it to an end with that original principle who is the ultimate cause of all things

hold! hold! cried demea: whither does your imagination hurry you? i joined in alliance with you, in order to prove the incomprehensible nature of the divine being, and refute the principles of cleanthes, who would measure every thing by human rule and standard. but i now find you running into all the topics of the greatest libertines and infidels, and betraying that holy cause which you seemingly espoused. are you secretly, then, a more dangerous enemy than cleanthes himself?
wait! wait! exclaimed demea: where is your imagination taking you? i allied myself with you in order to prove the incomprehensible nature of the divine being, and to refute the principles of cleanthes who wants to measure everything by human rules and standards. but now i find you agreeing with all the views of the greatest libertines and infidels, and betraying that holy cause which you seemed earlier to embrace. are you secretly, then, a more dangerous enemy than cleanthes himself?

and are you so late in perceiving it? replied cleanthes. believe me, demea, your friend philo, from the beginning, has been amusing himself at both our expense; and it must be confessed, that the injudicious reasoning of our vulgar theology has given him but too just a handle of ridicule. the total infirmity of human reason, the absolute incomprehensibility of the divine nature, the great and universal misery, and still greater wickedness of men; these are strange topics, surely, to be so fondly cherished by orthodox divines and doctors. in ages of stupidity and ignorance, indeed, these principles may safely be espoused; and perhaps no views of things are more proper to promote superstition, than such as encourage the blind amazement, the diffidence, and melancholy of mankind. but at present...
has it taken you this long to see that? replied cleanthes. believe me, demea, your friend philo has from the outset been amusing himself at my expense and at yours; and i must admit that the incautious reasoning of our common theology has given him all too good a handle for ridicule. the total infirmity of human reason, the absolute incomprehensibility of god's nature, the great and universal misery and the still greater wickedness of men these are strange themes, surely, to be so fondly cherished by orthodox churchmen and professors. in ages of stupidity and ignorance, indeed, these principles may safely be espoused; and it may be that the best way to promote superstition is to encourage mankind in its blind bewilderment, its lack of confidence, its gloom. but at present

blame not so much, interposed philo, the ignorance of these reverend gentlemen. they know how to change their style with the times. formerly it was a most popular theological topic to maintain, that human life was vanity and misery, and to exaggerate all the ills and pains which are incident to men. but of late years, divines, we find, begin to retract this position; and maintain, though still with some hesitation, that there are more goods than evils, more pleasures than pains, even in this life. when religion stood entirely upon temper and education, it was thought proper to encourage melancholy; as indeed mankind never have recourse to superior powers so readily as in that disposition. but as men have now learned to form principles, and to draw consequences, it is necessary to change the batteries, and to make use of such arguments as will endure at least some scrutiny and examination. this variation is the same (and from the same causes) with that which i formerly remarked with regard to scepticism.
don't blame the trouble so much on the ignorance of these reverend gentlemen, interrupted philo. they know how to change their style with the times. formerly it was a most popular line in theology to maintain that human life is empty and miserable, and to exaggerate all the ills and pains that men undergo. but in recent years we have found theologians beginning to withdraw from this position, and to maintain, though still with some hesitation, that even in this life there are more goods than evils, more pleasures than pains. when religion depended entirely on temperament and education, it was thought proper to encourage gloom; for indeed men are most ready to appeal to superior powers when they are feeling gloomy. but now that men have learned to form principles and draw conclusions, so that religion depends on arguments rather than merely on how you feel and how you have been indoctrinated, it is necessary to bring some different guns to bear, and to make use of arguments that can survive at least some scrutiny and examination. this change of tactics is the same (and from the same causes) as the one i formerly remarked on with regard to scepticism.

thus philo continued to the last his spirit of opposition, and his censure of established opinions. but i could observe that demea did not at all relish the latter part of the discourse; and he took occasion soon after, on some pretence or other, to leave the company.
in this way philo continued to the last his spirit of opposition, and his condemnation of established opinions. but i could see that demea didn't at all like the last part of what he said; and soon after that he made some excuse or other to leave the group.

part 12
part 12

after demea's departure, cleanthes and philo continued the conversation in the following manner. our friend, i am afraid, said cleanthes, will have little inclination to revive this topic of discourse, while you are in company; and to tell truth, philo, i should rather wish to reason with either of you apart on a subject so sublime and interesting. your spirit of controversy, joined to your abhorrence of vulgar superstition, carries you strange lengths, when engaged in an argument; and there is nothing so sacred and venerable, even in your own eyes, which you spare on that occasion.
after demea's departure, cleanthes and philo continued the conversation in the following manner. our friend, i am afraid, said cleanthes, won't be much inclined to revive this topic of discussion in a group containing you; and to tell you the truth, philo, on a subject that is so elevated and that matters so much i would prefer to reason with you, or with demea, alone. your spirit of controversy, joined to your hatred of common superstition, carries you to strange lengths when you are engaged in an argument; and on such an occasion you don't spare anything, however sacred and venerable it is, even in your own eyes.

i must confess, replied philo, that i am less cautious on the subject of natural religion than on any other; both because i know that i can never, on that head, corrupt the principles of any man of common sense; and because no one, i am confident, in whose eyes i appear a man of common sense, will ever mistake my intentions. you, in particular, cleanthes, with whom i live in unreserved intimacy; you are sensible, that notwithstanding the freedom of my conversation, and my love of singular arguments, no one has a deeper sense of religion impressed on his mind, or pays more profound adoration to the divine being, as he discovers himself to reason, in the inexplicable contrivance and artifice of nature. a purpose, an intention, a design, strikes every where the most careless, the most stupid thinker; and no man can be so hardened in absurd systems, as at all times to reject it. that nature does nothing in vain, is a maxim established in all the schools, merely from the contemplation of the works of nature, without any religious purpose; and, from a firm conviction of its truth, an anatomist, who had observed a new organ or canal, would never be satisfied till he had also discovered its use and intention. one great foundation of the copernican system is the maxim, that nature acts by the simplest methods, and chooses the most proper means to any end; and astronomers often, without thinking of it, lay this strong foundation of piety and religion. the same thing is observable in other parts of philosophy: and thus all the sciences almost lead us insensibly to acknowledge a first intelligent author; and their authority is often so much the greater, as they do not directly profess that intention.
i must admit, replied philo, that i am less cautious on the subject of natural religion than on any other; both because i know that i can never corrupt the principles (concerning religion) of any man of common sense, and because i am confident that no-one who sees me as a man of common sense will ever misunderstand my intentions. you, in particular, cleanthes, with whom i live in unreserved intimacy you are aware that despite the freedom of my conversation and my love of unusual arguments, no-one has a deeper sense of religion impressed on his mind than i do, or offers more profound adoration to the divine being as he reveals himself to our reason in the inexplicable design and artfulness of nature. the most careless, the most stupid, thinker sees everywhere a purpose, an intention, a design; and no man can be so hardened in absurd systems as to reject that at all times. that nature does nothing in vain is a maxim established in all the universities, merely on the strength of observing the works of nature, without any religious purpose; and from a firm conviction of its truth an anatomist who had observed a new organ or canal in an animal body would never be satisfied until he had also discovered what it does and what it is for. one great foundation of the copernican system is the maxim that nature acts by the simplest methods, and chooses the most proper means to any end; and astronomers often, without thinking of it, lay this strong foundation stone on which can be erected the edifice of piety and religion. the same thing is observable in other branches of learning; and thus almost all the sciences lead us insensibly to acknowledge a first thinking author; and their authority is often all the greater for the fact that they don't openly say that that's what they mean to do.

it is with pleasure i hear galen reason concerning the structure of the human body. the anatomy of a man, says he, discovers above 600 different muscles; and whoever duly considers these, will find, that, in each of them, nature must have adjusted at least ten different circumstances, in order to attain the end which she proposed; proper figure, just magnitude, right disposition of the several ends, upper and lower position of the whole, the due insertion of the several nerves, veins, and arteries: so that, in the muscles alone, above 6000 several views and intentions must have been formed and executed. the bones he calculates to be 284: the distinct purposes aimed at in the structure of each, above forty. what a prodigious display of artifice, even in these simple and homogeneous parts! but if we consider the skin, ligaments, vessels, glandules, humours, the several limbs and members of the body; how must our astonishment rise upon us, in proportion to the number and intricacy of the parts so artificially adjusted! the further we advance in these researches, we discover new scenes of art and wisdom: but descry still, at a distance, further scenes beyond our reach; in the fine internal structure of the parts, in the economy of the brain, in the fabric of the seminal vessels. all these artifices are repeated in every different species of animal, with wonderful variety, and with exact propriety, suited to the different intentions of nature in framing each species. and if the infidelity of galen, even when these natural sciences were still imperfect, could not withstand such striking appearances, to what pitch of pertinacious obstinacy must a philosopher in this age have attained, who can now doubt of a supreme intelligence!
it is with pleasure that i hear galen reason concerning the structure of the human body. the anatomy of a man, he says, reveals more than 600 different muscles; and anyone who studies these will find that in each of them nature must have taken into account at least ten different circumstances, in order to achieve the end that she proposed: right shape, right size, right disposition of the several ends,the upper and lower position of the whole muscle, the proper insertion of the various nerves, veins, and arteries; so that in the muscles alone more than 6,000 different plans and intentions must have been formed and carried out. he calculates that there are 284 bones, and that the structure of each of them aims at more than forty purposes. what an enormous display of planning, even in these simple and homogeneous parts! but if we consider the skin, ligaments, blood-vessels, glands, bodily fluids, the various limbs and members of the body how our astonishment must increase in proportion to the number and intricacy of the parts so artfully related to one another! as we go further in these researches, we discover new scenes of skill and wisdom; but we can tell that further down the smallness scale there are yet other scenes, beyond our perceptual reach, in the fine internal structure of the parts, in the organization of the brain, in the build of the seminal vessels. all these devices are repeated in every different species of animal, with wonderful variety, and in each case exactly right for the intentions of nature in forming the species in question. and if galen's irreligion couldn't withstand such striking appearances, even when these natural sciences were still imperfect, a scientist today must indeed be stubbornly obstinate if he can doubt that there is a supreme intelligence!

could i meet with one of this species (who, i thank god, are very rare), i would ask him: supposing there were a god, who did not discover himself immediately to our senses, were it possible for him to give stronger proofs of his existence, than what appear on the whole face of nature? what indeed could such a divine being do, but copy the present economy of things; render many of his artifices so plain, that no stupidity could mistake them; afford glimpses of still greater artifices, which demonstrate his prodigious superiority above our narrow apprehensions; and conceal altogether a great many from such imperfect creatures? now, according to all rules of just reasoning, every fact must pass for undisputed, when it is supported by all the arguments which its nature admits of; even though these arguments be not, in themselves, very numerous or forcible: how much more, in the present case, where no human imagination can compute their number, and no understanding estimate their cogency!
if i met with one of this sort (thank god, they are very rare), i would ask him: supposing there were a god who didn't reveal himself immediately to our senses enabling us to see or feel or hear him could he possibly give stronger proofs of his existence than the proofs that do appear on the whole face of nature? what indeed could such a divine being do but copy the present arrangement of things, make many of his artifices so obvious that no stupidity could mistake them, provide glimpses of still greater artifices that demonstrate his prodigious superiority above our narrow minds, and conceal a great many of them altogether from such imperfect creatures as we are? now, according to all rules of sound reasoning, every factual proposition counts as indisputable when it is supported by all the arguments that its nature admits of, even if those arguments aren't in themselves very numerous or strong; how much more this applies in the present case where no human imagination can compute the number of the arguments and no understanding can take in how strong they are!

i shall further add, said cleanthes, to what you have so well urged, that one great advantage of the principle of theism, is, that it is the only system of cosmogony which can be rendered intelligible and complete, and yet can throughout preserve a strong analogy to what we every day see and experience in the world. the comparison of the universe to a machine of human contrivance, is so obvious and natural, and is justified by so many instances of order and design in nature, that it must immediately strike all unprejudiced apprehensions, and procure universal approbation. whoever attempts to weaken this theory, cannot pretend to succeed by establishing in its place any other that is precise and determinate: it is sufficient for him if he start doubts and difficulties; and by remote and abstract views of things, reach that suspense of judgement, which is here the utmost boundary of his wishes. but, besides that this state of mind is in itself unsatisfactory, it can never be steadily maintained against such striking appearances as continually engage us into the religious hypothesis. a false, absurd system, human nature, from the force of prejudice, is capable of adhering to with obstinacy and perseverance: but no system at all, in opposition to a theory supported by strong and obvious reason, by natural propensity, and by early education, i think it absolutely impossible to maintain or defend.
i shall add, said cleanthes, to what you have so well urged that one great advantage of the principle of theism is that it's the only system of cosmogony that can be made intelligible and complete while also preserving throughout a strong analogy to what we see and experience in the world every day. the comparison of the universe to a machine of human design is so obvious and natural, and is justified by so many examples of order and design in nature, that it must immediately occur to all unprejudiced minds, and win universal approval. whoever wants to weaken this theory can't claim to succeed by establishing in its place any other that is precise and determinate, for there is no such rival: it is sufficient for him if he raises doubts and difficulties, and by remote and abstract views of things reaches that suspense of judgment which on this topic is the most he can wish for. but this state of mind, as well as being in itself unsatisfactory, can never be steadily maintained against such striking appearances as continually draw us into the religious hypothesis. human nature is capable, through the force of prejudice, of obstinately persevering in a false, absurd system; but i think it is absolutely impossible to maintain or defend having no system at all, in opposition to a theory that is supported by strong and obvious reasons, by natural propensity, and by early education.

so little, replied philo, do i esteem this suspense of judgement in the present case to be possible, that i am apt to suspect there enters somewhat of a dispute of words into this controversy, more than is usually imagined. that the works of nature bear a great analogy to the productions of art, is evident; and according to all the rules of good reasoning, we ought to infer, if we argue at all concerning them, that their causes have a proportional analogy. but as there are also considerable differences, we have reason to suppose a proportional difference in the causes; and in particular, ought to attribute a much higher degree of power and energy to the supreme cause, than any we have ever observed in mankind. here then the existence of a deity is plainly ascertained by reason: and if we make it a question, whether, on account of these analogies, we can properly call him a mind or intelligence, notwithstanding the vast difference which may reasonably be supposed between him and human minds; what is this but a mere verbal controversy? no man can deny the analogies between the effects: to restrain ourselves from inquiring concerning the causes is scarcely possible. from this inquiry, the legitimate conclusion is, that the causes have also an analogy: and if we are not contented with calling the first and supreme cause a god or deity, but desire to vary the expression; what can we call him but mind or thought, to which he is justly supposed to bear a considerable resemblance?
i have so little respect for this suspension of judgment about the existence of god, said philo, that i'm inclined to suspect that this controversy is more of a verbal dispute than is usually imagined. that the works of nature are very like the products of human ingenuity is evident; and according to all the rules of good reasoning we ought to infer if we argue at all about them that their causes are correspondingly alike. but as there are also considerable differences between the works of nature and human products, we have reason to suppose that their causes are correspondingly unalike, and that in particular we ought to attribute a much higher degree of power and energy to the supreme cause than to any we have ever observed in mankind. here then the existence of a god is plainly discovered by reason: and if there is a question as to whether these analogies entitle us to call him a mind or intelligence, given the vast difference that can reasonably be supposed to exist between him and human minds, what is this but a mere verbal controversy? no man can deny the likenesses between the effects; to hold back from enquiring about the causes is scarcely possible. from this enquiry the legitimate conclusion is that the causes are also alike in some respects; and if we aren't contented with calling the first and supreme cause only a god or deity but want to find other words to apply to him, what can we call him but mind or thought, given that he is justly supposed to bear a considerable resemblance to minds?

all men of sound reason are disgusted with verbal disputes, which abound so much in philosophical and theological inquiries; and it is found, that the only remedy for this abuse must arise from clear definitions, from the precision of those ideas which enter into any argument, and from the strict and uniform use of those terms which are employed. but there is a species of controversy, which, from the very nature of language and of human ideas, is involved in perpetual ambiguity, and can never, by any precaution or any definitions, be able to reach a reasonable certainty or precision. these are the controversies concerning the degrees of any quality or circumstance. men may argue to all eternity, whether hannibal be a great, or a very great, or a superlatively great man, what degree of beauty cleopatra possessed, what epithet of praise livy or thucydides is entitled to, without bringing the controversy to any determination. the disputants may here agree in their sense, and differ in the terms, or vice versa; yet never be able to define their terms, so as to enter into each other's meaning: because the degrees of these qualities are not, like quantity or number, susceptible of any exact mensuration, which may be the standard in the controversy. that the dispute concerning theism is of this nature, and consequently is merely verbal, or perhaps, if possible, still more incurably ambiguous, will appear upon the slightest inquiry. i ask the theist, if he does not allow, that there is a great and immeasurable, because incomprehensible difference between the human and the divine mind: the more pious he is, the more readily will he assent to the affirmative, and the more will he be disposed to magnify the difference: he will even assert, that the difference is of a nature which cannot be too much magnified. i next turn to the atheist, who, i assert, is only nominally so, and can never possibly be in earnest; and i ask him, whether, from the coherence and apparent sympathy in all the parts of this world, there be not a certain degree of analogy among all the operations of nature, in every situation and in every age; whether the rotting of a turnip, the generation of an animal, and the structure of human thought, be not energies that probably bear some remote analogy to each other: it is impossible he can deny it: he will readily acknowledge it. having obtained this concession, i push him still further in his retreat; and i ask him, if it be not probable, that the principle which first arranged, and still maintains order in this universe, bears not also some remote inconceivable analogy to the other operations of nature, and, among the rest, to the economy of human mind and thought. however reluctant, he must give his assent. where then, cry i to both these antagonists, is the subject of your dispute? the theist allows, that the original intelligence is very different from human reason: the atheist allows, that the original principle of order bears some remote analogy to it. will you quarrel, gentlemen, about the degrees, and enter into a controversy, which admits not of any precise meaning, nor consequently of any determination? if you should be so obstinate, i should not be surprised to find you insensibly change sides; while the theist, on the one hand, exaggerates the dissimilarity between the supreme being, and frail, imperfect, variable, fleeting, and mortal creatures; and the atheist, on the other, magnifies the analogy among all the operations of nature, in every period, every situation, and every position. consider then, where the real point of controversy lies; and if you cannot lay aside your disputes, endeavour, at least, to cure yourselves of your animosity.
all sensible people are annoyed by verbal disputes, which occur so often in philosophical and theological enquiries; and it is found that the only remedy for this misuse of language comes from clear definitions, from the precision of the ideas that enter into any argument, and from strictly keeping to the meanings of the terms one uses. but there is one sort of controversy which, from the very nature of language and of human ideas, is involved in perpetual ambiguity and can never, by any precaution or any definitions, reach a reasonable certainty or precision. these are the controversies about the degrees of any quality or circumstance. was hannibal a great, or a very great, or a superlatively great man? how beautiful was cleopatra? what term of praise is livy or thucydides entitled to? men may argue to all eternity about such questions without ever settling on agreed answers. the disputants may here agree in what they think, and differ in the words they use or vice versa and yet never be able to define their terms so as to understand each other's meaning. that's because the degrees of these qualities, unlike quantity or number, can't be measured on any exact scale that could be the standard in the controversy. the slightest enquiry reveals that the dispute concerning theism is of this nature, and consequently is merely verbal or perhaps still more incurably ambiguous, if that is possible. i ask the theist if he doesn't agree that the difference between the human mind and the divine mind is great and (because it is incomprehensible) immeasurable; and the more pious he is the readier he will be to agree, and the more he will be disposed to magnify the difference; he will even assert that the difference is so great that it would be impossible to exaggerate how great it is. i next turn to the atheist who i say is only nominally an atheist, and can't possibly be seriously so and i ask him whether, judging by the coherence and apparent co-ordination among all the parts of this world, there isn't a certain similarity among all the operations of nature, in every situation and in every age whether the rotting of a turnip, the coming into existence of an animal, and the structure of human thought, are not energies that probably bear some remote analogy to each other and he can't possibly deny it; indeed, he will readily acknowledge it. having obtained this concession from him, i push the self-described atheist back still further: i ask him if it isn't likely that the source that first ordered this universe in general and still keeps it in order bears also some remote and hard-to-grasp analogy to the particular operations of nature, including the arrangements that produce the human mind and thought. however reluctantly, he must say yes. then i ask both these antagonists: what are you arguing about? the theist allows that the original intelligence is very different from human reason; the atheist allows that the original source of order bears some remote analogy to it. will you quarrel, gentlemen, about the degrees of difference and of similarity, and enter into a controversy that can't be made precise and thus can't be settled? if you were to persist obstinately, i wouldn't be surprised to find you unknowingly changing sides the theist exaggerating the dissimilarity between the supreme being and frail, imperfect, variable, fleeting, and mortal creatures, while the atheist exaggerates the similarity that there is among all the operations of nature, at every time and in every place and circumstance! consider, then, what you are really disagreeing about, and if you can't set aside the disagreement, at least realize that it concerns the place of certain dissimilarities on a scale for which there is no precise measure, and thus try to cure yourselves of your hostility to one another.

and here i must also acknowledge, cleanthes, that as the works of nature have a much greater analogy to the effects of our art and contrivance, than to those of our benevolence and justice, we have reason to infer, that the natural attributes of the deity have a greater resemblance to those of men, than his moral have to human virtues. but what is the consequence? nothing but this, that the moral qualities of man are more defective in their kind than his natural abilities. for, as the supreme being is allowed to be absolutely and entirely perfect, whatever differs most from him, departs the furthest from the supreme standard of rectitude and perfection.
and here i must also acknowledge, cleanthes, that as the works of nature are more like the effects of our skill and planning than they are like the effects of our benevolence and justice, we have reason to infer that god's non-moral attributes have a greater resemblance to those of men than his moral attributes have to human virtues. but what follows from that? only that man's moral qualities are more defective in their kind than are his non-moral abilities for example, that man's justice is a worse sample of justice than his cleverness is a sample of cleverness. for it is agreed that god is absolutely and entirely perfect, so whatever differs most from him departs the furthest from the supreme standard of moral uprightness and perfection.

my inclination, replied cleanthes, lies, i own, a contrary way. religion, however corrupted, is still better than no religion at all. the doctrine of a future state is so strong and necessary a security to morals, that we never ought to abandon or neglect it. for if finite and temporary rewards and punishments have so great an effect, as we daily find; how much greater must be expected from such as are infinite and eternal?
my inclination, replied cleanthes, lies in a different direction. religion, however corrupted, is still better than no religion at all. the doctrine of a future state is so strong and necessary a security to morals that we never ought to abandon or neglect it. for if finite and temporary rewards and punishments have such a great effect as we daily find that they do, how much greater must be expected from rewards and punishments that are infinite and eternal?

how happens it then, said philo, if vulgar superstition be so salutary to society, that all history abounds so much with accounts of its pernicious consequences on public affairs? factions, civil wars, persecutions, subversions of government, oppression, slavery; these are the dismal consequences which always attend its prevalency over the minds of men. if the religious spirit be ever mentioned in any historical narration, we are sure to meet afterwards with a detail of the miseries which attend it. and no period of time can be happier or more prosperous, than those in which it is never regarded or heard of.
if common superstition is so good for society, said philo, then how does it happen that history is so full of accounts of its pernicious effects on public affairs? factions, civil wars, persecutions, subversions of government, oppression, slavery these are the dismal consequences which always accompany a prevalence of superstition in the minds of men. whenever an historical narrative mentions the religious spirit, we are sure to find later in the story some details of the miseries that come with it. no period of time can be happier or more prosperous than those in which the religious spirit is never honoured or heard of.

the reason of this observation, replied cleanthes, is obvious. the proper office of religion is to regulate the heart of men, humanise their conduct, infuse the spirit of temperance, order, and obedience; and as its operation is silent, and only enforces the motives of morality and justice, it is in danger of being overlooked, and confounded with these other motives. when it distinguishes itself, and acts as a separate principle over men, it has departed from its proper sphere, and has become only a cover to faction and ambition.
the reason for this, replied cleanthes, is obvious. the proper role of religion is to regulate the heart of men, humanize their conduct, infuse the spirit of temperance, order, and obedience; and as it works silently, and only strengthens the motives of morality and justice, it is in danger of being overlooked and being confused with those other motives. when religion calls attention to itself and acts as a separate motive force in men instead of being only a good influence on all the other motive forces it has left its proper sphere and has become only a cover for faction and ambition.

and so will all religion, said philo, except the philosophical and rational kind. your reasonings are more easily eluded than my facts. the inference is not just, because finite and temporary rewards and punishments have so great influence, that therefore such as are infinite and eternal must have so much greater. consider, i beseech you, the attachment which we have to present things, and the little concern which we discover for objects so remote and uncertain. when divines are declaiming against the common behaviour and conduct of the world, they always represent this principle as the strongest imaginable (which indeed it is); and describe almost all human kind as lying under the influence of it, and sunk into the deepest lethargy and unconcern about their religious interests. yet these same divines, when they refute their speculative antagonists, suppose the motives of religion to be so powerful, that, without them, it were impossible for civil society to subsist; nor are they ashamed of so palpable a contradiction. it is certain, from experience, that the smallest grain of natural honesty and benevolence has more effect on men's conduct, than the most pompous views suggested by theological theories and systems. a man's natural inclination works incessantly upon him; it is for ever present to the mind, and mingles itself with every view and consideration: whereas religious motives, where they act at all, operate only by starts and bounds; and it is scarcely possible for them to become altogether habitual to the mind. the force of the greatest gravity, say the philosophers, is infinitely small, in comparison of that of the least impulse: yet it is certain, that the smallest gravity will, in the end, prevail above a great impulse; because no strokes or blows can be repeated with such constancy as attraction and gravitation.
and so will all religion, said philo, except the philosophical and rational kind. your reasonings are easier to escape from than are my facts. because finite and temporary rewards and punishments have so great influence, therefore infinite and eternal ones must have so much greater this reasoning is not sound. consider, i beg you, how much we care about present things, and how little concern we express for objects as remote and uncertain as the rewards or punishments promised in the after-life. when preachers declaim against the common behaviour and conduct of the world, they always represent this principle of concern for what is close as the strongest imaginable (which indeed it is); and they describe most of mankind as lying under its influence, and sunk into the deepest lethargy and lack of concern for their religious interests. yet these same religious spokesmen, defending religion against attacks, take the motives of religion to be so powerful that civil society couldn't survive without them; and they aren't ashamed of this obvious contradiction. experience shows us, for sure, that the smallest grain of natural honesty and benevolence has more effect on men's conduct than the most grandly inflated views suggested by theological theories and systems. a man's natural inclination works on him all the time; it is always present to his mind, and mingles itself with every view and consideration; whereas religious motives, where they act at all, operate only by fits and starts, and it is scarcely possible for them to become altogether habitual to the mind. the force of the greatest gravitational pull, say the physicists, is incomparably smaller than the force of the least push; yet it is certain that the smallest gravity will eventually prevail over a large push, because no strokes or blows can be repeated with such constancy as attraction and gravitation.

another advantage of inclination: it engages on its side all the wit and ingenuity of the mind; and when set in opposition to religious principles, seeks every method and art of eluding them: in which it is almost always successful. who can explain the heart of man, or account for those strange salvos and excuses, with which people satisfy themselves, when they follow their inclinations in opposition to their religious duty? this is well understood in the world; and none but fools ever repose less trust in a man, because they hear, that from study and philosophy, he has entertained some speculative doubts with regard to theological subjects. and when we have to do with a man, who makes a great profession of religion and devotion, has this any other effect upon several, who pass for prudent, than to put them on their guard, lest they be cheated and deceived by him?
another advantage that inclination has in the tussle with duty: it brings into play on its side all the sharpness and ingenuity of the mind, and when it is placed in opposition to religious principles it seeks every method and device for eluding them and it nearly always succeeds! who can explain the heart of man, or account for those strange specialpleadings and excuses with which people let themselves off when they are following their inclinations in opposition to their religious duty? this is well understood in the world; and only fools would trust a man less because they heard that study and philosophy have given him some speculative doubts with regard to theological subjects. and when we have dealings with a man who makes a great profession of religion and devotion, doesn't this put many sensible people on their guard against being cheated and deceived by him?

we must further consider, that philosophers, who cultivate reason and reflection, stand less in need of such motives to keep them under the restraint of morals; and that the vulgar, who alone may need them, are utterly incapable of so pure a religion as represents the deity to be pleased with nothing but virtue in human behaviour. the recommendations to the divinity are generally supposed to be either frivolous observances, or rapturous ecstasies, or a bigoted credulity. we need not run back into antiquity, or wander into remote regions, to find instances of this degeneracy. amongst ourselves, some have been guilty of that atrociousness, unknown to the egyptian and grecian superstitions, of declaiming in express terms, against morality; and representing it as a sure forfeiture of the divine favour, if the least trust or reliance be laid upon it.
we must further consider that philosophers, who cultivate reason and reflection, have less need of such religious motives to keep them under the restraint of morals; and that common people the only ones who may need religion to keep them in order can't possibly have a religion so pure that it represents god as being pleased with nothing but virtue in human behaviour. pleas for god's favour are generally understood to be either frivolous observances, or rapturous ecstasies, or a bigoted credulity and therefore not to reflect or to encourage moral seriousness. we needn't go back to ancient times, or wander into remote places, to find instances of this degeneracy of religion divorced from morality. amongst ourselves some people have been guilty of something atrocious that even the egyptian and greek superstitions were not guilty of, namely, speaking out explicitly against morality, saying that if one puts the least trust or reliance in morality one will certainly lose favour with god.

but even though superstition or enthusiasm should not put itself in direct opposition to morality; the very diverting of the attention, the raising up a new and frivolous species of merit, the preposterous distribution which it makes of praise and blame, must have the most pernicious consequences, and weaken extremely men's attachment to the natural motives of justice and humanity.
and even if superstition or fanaticism didn't put itself in direct opposition to morality, it would still have the most pernicious consequences, greatly weakening men's attachment to the natural motives of justice and humanity. it would do this because of its diverting of the attention away from morality, its raising up of a new and frivolous sort of supposed merit, and the preposterous way in which it distributes praise and blame.

such a principle of action likewise, not being any of the familiar motives of human conduct, acts only by intervals on the temper; and must be roused by continual efforts, in order to render the pious zealot satisfied with his own conduct, and make him fulfil his devotional task. many religious exercises are entered into with seeming fervour, where the heart, at the time, feels cold and languid: a habit of dissimulation is by degrees contracted; and fraud and falsehood become the predominant principle. hence the reason of that vulgar observation, that the highest zeal in religion and the deepest hypocrisy, so far from being inconsistent, are often or commonly united in the same individual character.
such a religious action-driver, not being one of the familiar motives of human conduct, acts only intermittently on a person's temperament; and it has to be roused by continual efforts in order to render the pious zealot satisfied with his own conduct and make him fulfil his devotional task. many religious exercises are begun with seeming fervour although the person's heart at the time feels cold and apathetic; he gradually acquires a habit of covering up his true feelings; and fraud and falsehood eventually become the predominant force in his mind. this explains the common observation that the highest zeal in religion and the deepest hypocrisy, so far from being inconsistent, are often or usually united in the same individual person.

the bad effects of such habits, even in common life, are easily imagined; but where the interests of religion are concerned, no morality can be forcible enough to bind the enthusiastic zealot. the sacredness of the cause sanctifies every measure which can be made use of to promote it.
the bad effects of such habits, even in ordinary everyday life, are easily imagined; but where the interests of religion are concerned, no morality can be strong enough to constrain the fanatical zealot. the sacredness of his cause he thinks sanctifies anything that he does to promote it.

the steady attention alone to so important an interest as that of eternal salvation, is apt to extinguish the benevolent affections, and beget a narrow, contracted selfishness. and when such a temper is encouraged, it easily eludes all the general precepts of charity and benevolence.
steadily and exclusively attending to something as important to oneself as eternal salvation is apt to extinguish one's benevolent feelings and to generate a narrow, contracted selfishness. and when such a temperament is encouraged, it easily eludes all the general precepts of charity and benevolence.

thus, the motives of vulgar superstition have no great influence on general conduct; nor is their operation favourable to morality, in the instances where they predominate.
thus, the motives of common superstition have no great influence on general conduct, and where they do predominate their influence is not favourable to morality.

is there any maxim in politics more certain and infallible, than that both the number and authority of priests should be confined within very narrow limits; and that the civil magistrate ought, for ever, to keep his fasces and axes from such dangerous hands? but if the spirit of popular religion were so salutary to society, a contrary maxim ought to prevail. the greater number of priests, and their greater authority and riches, will always augment the religious spirit. and though the priests have the guidance of this spirit, why may we not expect a superior sanctity of life, and greater benevolence and moderation, from persons who are set apart for religion, who are continually inculcating it upon others, and who must themselves imbibe a greater share of it? whence comes it then, that, in fact, the utmost a wise magistrate can propose with regard to popular religions, is, as far as possible, to make a saving game of it, and to prevent their pernicious consequences with regard to society? every expedient which he tries for so humble a purpose is surrounded with inconveniences. if he admits only one religion among his subjects, he must sacrifice, to an uncertain prospect of tranquillity, every consideration of public liberty, science, reason, industry, and even his own independency. if he gives indulgence to several sects, which is the wiser maxim, he must preserve a very philosophical indifference to all of them, and carefully restrain the pretensions of the prevailing sect; otherwise he can expect nothing but endless disputes, quarrels, factions, persecutions, and civil commotions.
is any maxim in politics more certain and infallible than the one saying that the number and the authority of priests should be confined within very narrow limits, and that the civil magistrate ought never to allow the instruments of his authority fall into such dangerous hands as those of priests? but if the spirit of popular religion were as salutary to society as its defenders say it is, a contrary maxim ought to prevail, reflecting a line of thought like the following: the more priests there are in law and government, the better. a greater number of priests, and their greater authority and riches, will always increase the religious spirit. and though the priests have the guidance of this spirit, we can expect them also to develop ever greater moral decency in their feelings. why should we not expect a superior sanctity of life, and greater benevolence and moderation, from people who are set apart for religion, who are continually preaching it to others, and who must themselves imbibe a greater share of it? then how does it come about that in fact the most that a wise ruler can propose with regard to popular religions is, as far as possible, to make a saving game of it, and to prevent their pernicious consequences with regard to society? every means he uses to carry out this modest purpose is surrounded with inconveniences. if he allows only one religion among his subjects, he must sacrifice every consideration of public liberty, science, reason, industry, and even his own independence all this in return for an uncertain prospect of religious peace. if he allows several sects, which is the wiser course for him to follow, he must preserve a very philosophical even-handedness regarding all of them, and carefully restrain the claims of the dominant sect; otherwise he can expect nothing but endless disputes, quarrels, factions, persecutions, and civil commotions.

true religion, i allow, has no such pernicious consequences: but we must treat of religion, as it has commonly been found in the world; nor have i any thing to do with that speculative tenet of theism, which, as it is a species of philosophy, must partake of the beneficial influence of that principle, and at the same time must lie under a like inconvenience, of being always confined to very few persons.
true religion, i admit, has no such pernicious consequences; but we have to concern ourselves not with true religion, but with religion as it has commonly been found in the world. and i am not discussing the speculative thesis of theism: being a philosophical theory, it must share in the beneficial influence of philosophy, while also suffering from philosophy's drawback of being accepted by very few people.

oaths are requisite in all courts of judicature; but it is a question whether their authority arises from any popular religion. it is the solemnity and importance of the occasion, the regard to reputation, and the reflecting on the general interests of society, which are the chief restraints upon mankind. custom-house oaths and political oaths are but little regarded even by some who pretend to principles of honesty and religion; and a quaker's asseveration is with us justly put upon the same footing with the oath of any other person. i know, that polybius ascribes the infamy of greek faith to the prevalency of the epicurean philosophy: but i know also, that punic faith had as bad a reputation in ancient times as irish evidence has in modern; though we cannot account for these vulgar observations by the same reason. not to mention that greek faith was infamous before the rise of the epicurean philosophy; and euripides, in a passage which i shall point out to you, has glanced a remarkable stroke of satire against his nation, with regard to this circumstance.
oaths are required in all courts of law, but does their authority arise from any popular religion? i say no. the chief restraints on mankind are the solemnity and importance of the occasion, a concern for one's reputation, and reflection on the general interests of society. custom-house oaths and political oaths are not regarded as binding even by some who claim to abide by principles of honesty and religion; and we rightly put a quaker's assertion on the same footing as the oath of any other person. i know that polybius ascribes the notorious untrustworthiness of the greeks to the prevalence of the epicurean philosophy; but i know also that carthaginian promises had as bad a reputation in ancient times as irish testimony does today, and we can't account for these general impressions in the same way, namely the influence of epicurean philosophy. not to mention that the greeks were already notoriously untrustworthy before the rise of the epicurean philosophy, and euripides has aimed a remarkable stroke of satire against his nation, with regard to trustworthiness.

take care, philo, replied cleanthes, take care: push not matters too far: allow not your zeal against false religion to undermine your veneration for the true. forfeit not this principle, the chief, the only great comfort in life; and our principal support amidst all the attacks of adverse fortune. the most agreeable reflection, which it is possible for human imagination to suggest, is that of genuine theism, which represents us as the workmanship of a being perfectly good, wise, and powerful; who created us for happiness; and who, having implanted in us immeasurable desires of good, will prolong our existence to all eternity, and will transfer us into an infinite variety of scenes, in order to satisfy those desires, and render our felicity complete and durable. next to such a being himself (if the comparison be allowed), the happiest lot which we can imagine, is that of being under his guardianship and protection.
take care, philo, replied cleanthes, take care! don't push matters too far; don't allow your zeal against false religion to undermine your reverence for the true. don't give up this religious principle, which is the chief, the only great comfort in life, and our principal support amidst all the attacks of adverse fortune. the most agreeable reflection that the human imagination can possibly suggest is that of genuine theism, which represents us as the workmanship of a being who is perfectly good, wise, and powerful; a being who created us to be happy and who, having implanted in us immeasurable desires for good things, will prolong our existence to all eternity, taking us into an infinite variety of scenes in order to satisfy those desires, and make our happiness complete and lasting. to be under the guardianship and protection of such a divine being is the happiest prospect we can imagine second only (if this comparison is permissible) to the happiness of the divine being himself.

these appearances, said philo, are most engaging and alluring; and with regard to the true philosopher, they are more than appearances. but it happens here, as in the former case, that, with regard to the greater part of mankind, the appearances are deceitful, and that the terrors of religion commonly prevail above its comforts.
that picture of how a person seems to relate to religion, said philo, is most engaging and alluring, and when the person is a true philosopher it is more than just seeming. but here as before, with regard to the greater part of mankind the appearances are deceitful, and the terrors of religion commonly prevail over its comforts.

it is allowed, that men never have recourse to devotion so readily as when dejected with grief or depressed with sickness. is not this a proof, that the religious spirit is not so nearly allied to joy as to sorrow?
it is common knowledge that men never seek help from devotion so readily as when they are dejected with grief or depressed by sickness. doesn't that show that the religious spirit is not so closely tied to joy as it is to sorrow?

but men, when afflicted, find consolation in religion, replied cleanthes. sometimes, said philo: but it is natural to imagine, that they will form a notion of those unknown beings, suitably to the present gloom and melancholy of their temper, when they betake themselves to the contemplation of them. accordingly, we find the tremendous images to predominate in all religions; and we ourselves, after having employed the most exalted expression in our descriptions of the deity, fall into the flattest contradiction in affirming that the damned are infinitely superior in number to the elect.
but when men are afflicted they find consolation in religion, replied cleanthes. sometimes, said philo; but it is natural to imagine that when they apply themselves to the contemplation of those unknown beings the gods of their religion they will form a notion of them that is suitable to their own present gloom and melancholy. accordingly, we find in every religion that the images of god as fearsome predominate over all the other images of him; and we ourselves, after using the most exalted language in our descriptions of god, fall into the flattest contradiction when we affirm that the damned infinitely outnumber those who are chosen to be saved.

i shall venture to affirm, that there never was a popular religion, which represented the state of departed souls in such a light, as would render it eligible for human kind that there should be such a state. these fine models of religion are the mere product of philosophy. for as death lies between the eye and the prospect of futurity, that event is so shocking to nature, that it must throw a gloom on all the regions which lie beyond it; and suggest to the generality of mankind the idea of cerberus and furies; devils, and torrents of fire and brimstone.
i venture to assert that there has never been a popular religion which represented the state of departed souls in such a way as to make it a good thing from the human point of view that there should be such a state. these fine models of religion that you speak of so cheerfully, cleanthes, are the mere product of philosophy and get no grip on the ordinary thoughts and feelings of ordinary people. when plain folk try to imagine the after-life, death intervenes between the mind's eye and the object; and death is so shocking to nature that it throws a gloom on all the regions that lie on the far side of it, and suggests to the general run of people the idea of cerberus and furies, devils, and torrents of fire and brimstone.

it is true, both fear and hope enter into religion; because both these passions, at different times, agitate the human mind, and each of them forms a species of divinity suitable to itself. but when a man is in a cheerful disposition, he is fit for business, or company, or entertainment of any kind; and he naturally applies himself to these, and thinks not of religion. when melancholy and dejected, he has nothing to do but brood upon the terrors of the invisible world, and to plunge himself still deeper in affliction. it may indeed happen, that after he has, in this manner, engraved the religious opinions deep into his thought and imagination, there may arrive a change of health or circumstances, which may restore his good humour, and raising cheerful prospects of futurity, make him run into the other extreme of joy and triumph. but still it must be acknowledged, that, as terror is the primary principle of religion, it is the passion which always predominates in it, and admits but of short intervals of pleasure.
it is true that both fear and hope enter into religion, because both those passions agitate the human mind from time to time, and each of them forms a kind of divinity suitable to itself. but when a man is in a cheerful frame of mind he is fit for business, or company, or entertainment of any kind, and he naturally turns his attention to these and doesn't think of religion. when gloomy and dejected, on the other hand, he hasn't the spirit or energy to apply himself to anything in this world, so all he can do is to brood on the terrors of the after-world, and thus make his condition worse than ever. it may indeed happen that after he has in this way engraved the religious opinions deep into his thought and imagination, some change of health or circumstances restores his good-humour and, raising cheerful prospects of the after-life, send him to the other extreme of joy and triumph. but still it must be admitted that, as terror is the driving force of religion, it is the passion that always predominates in it, and allows for only short periods of pleasure.

not to mention, that these fits of excessive, enthusiastic joy, by exhausting the spirits, always prepare the way for equal fits of superstitious terror and dejection; nor is there any state of mind so happy as the calm and equable. but this state it is impossible to support, where a man thinks that he lies in such profound darkness and uncertainty, between an eternity of happiness and an eternity of misery. no wonder that such an opinion disjoints the ordinary frame of the mind, and throws it into the utmost confusion. and though that opinion is seldom so steady in its operation as to influence all the actions; yet it is apt to make a considerable breach in the temper, and to produce that gloom and melancholy so remarkable in all devout people.
a further point: these bouts of excessive, extravagant joy, by exhausting the spirits, always prepare the way for equal bouts of superstitious terror and dejection. the happiest state of mind is not frenzied joy, but balanced calm. but it is impossible for a man to remain long in that state when he thinks that he lies in such profound darkness and uncertainty between an eternity of happiness and an eternity of misery. no wonder that such an opinion unhinges the ordinary frame of the mind and throws it into the utmost confusion. and though that opinion is seldom so steady in its operation that it influences all the person's actions, it is apt to make considerable inroads on his temperament, and to produce the gloom and melancholy that are so noticeable in all devout people.

it is contrary to common sense to entertain apprehensions or terrors upon account of any opinion whatsoever, or to imagine that we run any risk hereafter, by the freest use of our reason. such a sentiment implies both an absurdity and an inconsistency. it is an absurdity to believe that the deity has human passions, and one of the lowest of human passions, a restless appetite for applause. it is an inconsistency to believe, that, since the deity has this human passion, he has not others also; and, in particular, a disregard to the opinions of creatures so much inferior.
it is contrary to common sense to be anxious or terrified about what may happen to us in the after-life on account of any opinion that we have, or to imagine that the freest use of our reason will run us into any risk in the hereafter. such a view implies both an absurdity and an inconsistency. it is an absurdity to believe that god has human passions, and indeed one of the lowest of them, namely a restless appetite for applause. it is an inconsistency to believe that god has this human passion but doesn't have others also, and especially a disregard for the opinions of creatures so much inferior.

to know god, says seneca, is to worship him. all other worship is indeed absurd, superstitious, and even impious. it degrades him to the low condition of mankind, who are delighted with entreaty, solicitation, presents, and flattery. yet is this impiety the smallest of which superstition is guilty. commonly, it depresses the deity far below the condition of mankind; and represents him as a capricious demon, who exercises his power without reason and without humanity! and were that divine being disposed to be offended at the vices and follies of silly mortals, who are his own workmanship, ill would it surely fare with the votaries of most popular superstitions. nor would any of human race merit his favour, but a very few, the philosophical theists, who entertain, or rather indeed endeavour to entertain, suitable notions of his divine perfections: as the only persons entitled to his compassion and indulgence would be the philosophical sceptics, a sect almost equally rare, who, from a natural diffidence of their own capacity, suspend, or endeavour to suspend, all judgement with regard to such sublime and such extraordinary subjects.
to know god, says seneca, is to worship him. all other worship that is, all worship that goes beyond expressing one's knowledge that god exists is indeed absurd, superstitious, and even impious. it degrades god to the low condition of ordinary men, who are delighted to be approached with entreaties, requests, presents, and flattery. yet this is the least of the impieties of which superstition is guilty. commonly, superstition pushes god down to a level far below that of mankind, and represents him as a capricious demon who exercises his power without reason and without humanity! if god were inclined to be offended at the vices and follies of silly mortals who are his own workmanship, the devotees of most popular superstitions would be in for a very bad time. none of the human race would deserve his favour except for a very few, the philosophical theists, who have or at any rate try to have suitable notions of his divine perfections; and the only persons entitled to his compassion and leniency would be the philosophical sceptics, an almost equally small sect, whose natural modesty about their own capacities leads them to suspend or try to suspend all judgment with regard to such sublime and extraordinary subjects.

if the whole of natural theology, as some people seem to maintain, resolves itself into one simple, though somewhat ambiguous, at least undefined proposition, that the cause or causes of order in the universe probably bear some remote analogy to human intelligence: if this proposition be not capable of extension, variation, or more particular explication: if it affords no inference that affects human life, or can be the source of any action or forbearance: and if the analogy, imperfect as it is, can be carried no further than to the human intelligence, and cannot be transferred, with any appearance of probability, to the other qualities of the mind; if this really be the case, what can the most inquisitive, contemplative, and religious man do more than give a plain, philosophical assent to the proposition, as often as it occurs, and believe that the arguments on which it is established exceed the objections which lie against it? some astonishment, indeed, will naturally arise from the greatness of the object; some melancholy from its obscurity; some contempt of human reason, that it can give no solution more satisfactory with regard to so extraordinary and magnificent a question. but believe me, cleanthes, the most natural sentiment which a well-disposed mind will feel on this occasion, is a longing desire and expectation that heaven would be pleased to dissipate, at least alleviate, this profound ignorance, by affording some more particular revelation to mankind, and making discoveries of the nature, attributes, and operations of the divine object of our faith. a person, seasoned with a just sense of the imperfections of natural reason, will fly to revealed truth with the greatest avidity: while the haughty dogmatist, persuaded that he can erect a complete system of theology by the mere help of philosophy, disdains any further aid, and rejects this adventitious instructor. to be a philosophical sceptic is, in a man of letters, the first and most essential step towards being a sound, believing christian; a proposition which i would willingly recommend to the attention of pamphilus: and i hope cleanthes will forgive me for interposing so far in the education and instruction of his pupil.
if the whole of natural theology, as some people seem to maintain, boils down to one simple, though somewhat ambiguous or at least undefined proposition: the cause or causes of order in the universe probably bear some remote analogy to human intelligence; if this proposition can't be extended, varied, or explained in more detail; if it yields no inference that affects human life or can be the source of any action or forbearance from acting; and if the analogy, imperfect as it is, extends only to human intelligence, and can't plausibly be transferred to the other qualities of the mind if all this really is the case, what can the most curious, thoughtful, and religious man do except give a plain, philosophical assent to the proposition as often as it comes up, and believe that the arguments on which it is based outweigh the objections against it? he will naturally feel somewhat unnerved by the greatness of the object, that is, by the thought of the cause of the universe; somewhat sad that the object is hidden from him; somewhat contemptuous of human reason for its inability to make a better job of such an extraordinary and magnificent question. but believe me, cleanthes, the most natural feeling that a well-disposed mind will have on this occasion is a longing desire and expectation that god will be pleased to remove or at least to lessen this profound ignorance, by giving mankind some particular revelation, revealing the nature, attributes, and operations of the divine object of our faith. a person who has a sound sense of the imperfections of natural reason will eagerly fly to revealed truth, while the haughty dogmatist, persuaded that he can erect a complete system of theology with no help but that of philosophy, will disdain any further aid and will reject this help from the outside. to be a philosophical sceptic is, in a man of letters, the first and most essential step towards being a sound, believing christian; a proposition which i would willingly recommend to the attention of pamphilus: and i hope cleanthes will forgive me for interposing so far in the education and instruction of his pupil.

cleanthes and philo pursued not this conversation much further: and as nothing ever made greater impression on me, than all the reasonings of that day, so i confess, that, upon a serious review of the whole, i cannot but think, that philo's principles are more probable than demea's; but that those of cleanthes approach still nearer to the truth.
cleanthes and philo did not pursue this conversation much further; and as nothing ever made greater impression on me than all the reasonings of that day, so i confess that on carefully looking over the whole conversation i cannot help thinking that philo's principles are more probable than demea's, but that those of cleanthes approach still nearer to the truth.

if these papers have that evidence, i flatter myself is to be found in them, there will be no great miss of those which are lost, and my reader may be satisfied without them: for i imagine, i shall have neither the time, nor inclination to repeat my pains, and fill up the wanting part of my answer, by tracing sir robert again, through all the windings and obscurities, which are to be met with in the several branches of his wonderful system. the king, and body of the nation, have since so thoroughly confuted his hypothesis, that i suppose no body hereafter will have either the confidence to appear against our common safety, and be again an advocate for slavery; or the weakness to be deceived with contradictions dressed up in a popular stile, and well-turned periods: for if any one will be at the pains, himself, in those parts, which are here untouched, to strip sir robert's discourses of the flourish of doubtful expressions, and endeavour to reduce his words to direct, positive, intelligible propositions, and then compare them one with another, he will quickly be satisfied, there was never so much glib nonsense put together in well-sounding english. if he think it not worth while to examine his works all thro, let him make an experiment in that part, where he treats of usurpation; and let him try, whether he can, with all his skill, make sir robert intelligible, and consistent with himself, or common sense. i should not speak so plainly of a gentleman, long since past answering, had not the pulpit, of late years, publicly owned his doctrine, and made it the current divinity of the times. it is necessary those men, who taking on them to be teachers, have so dangerously misled others, should be openly shewed of what authority this their patriarch is, whom they have so blindly followed, that so they may either retract what upon so ill grounds they have vented, and cannot be maintained; or else justify those principles which they preached up for gospel; though they had no better an author than an english courtier: for i should not have writ against sir robert, or taken the pains to shew his mistakes, inconsistencies, and want of (what he so much boasts of, and pretends wholly to build on) scripture-proofs, were there not men amongst us, who, by crying up his books, and espousing his doctrine, save me from the reproach of writing against a dead adversary. they have been so zealous in this point, that, if i have done him any wrong, i cannot hope they should spare me. i wish, where they have done the truth and the public wrong, they would be as ready to redress it, and allow its just weight to this reflection, viz. that there cannot be done a greater mischief to prince and people, than the propagating wrong notions concerning government; that so at last all times might not have reason to complain of the drum ecclesiastic. if any one, concerned really for truth, undertake the confutation of my hypothesis, i promise him either to recant my mistake, upon fair conviction; or to answer his difficulties. but he must remember two things. first, that cavilling here and there, at some expression, or little incident of my discourse, is not an answer to my book. secondly, that i shall not take railing for arguments, nor think either of these worth my notice, though i shall always look on myself as bound to give satisfaction to any one, who shall appear to be conscientiously scrupulous in the point, and shall shew any just grounds for his scruples.
these surviving pages, i hope, are sufficient to establish the throne of our great restorer, our present king william; to justify his title to the throne on the basis of the consent of the people, which is the only lawful basis for government, and which he possesses more fully and clearly than any other ruler in the christian world; and to justify to the world the people of england, whose love of their just and natural rights, and their resolve to preserve them, saved this nation when it was on the brink of slavery and ruin under king james ii. if these pages are as convincing as i flatter myself that they are, the missing pages will be no great loss, and my reader can be satisfied without them. i certainly hope so, because i don't expect to have either the time of the inclination to take all that trouble again, filling up the gap in my answer by again tracking sir robert filmer through all the windings and obscurities of his amazing system. the king and the nation as a whole have since so thoroughly refuted his hypothesis that i don't think anyone ever again will be bold enough to speak up against our common safety, and be an advocate for slavery, or weak enough to be deceived by contradictions dressed up in elegant language. if you take the trouble to tackle the parts of sir robert's discourses that are not dealt with here, stripping off the flourish of dubious expressions and trying to turn his words into direct, positive, intelligible propositions, and if you then compare these propositions with one another, you will soon be satisfied that there was never so much glib nonsense put together in fine-sounding english. if you don't think it worthwhile to look through all his work, just try the part where he discusses usurpation, and see whether all your skill is enough to make sir robert intelligible and consistent with himself and with common sense. i wouldn't speak so plainly of a gentleman who is no longer in a position to answer, if it weren't that in recent years preachers have been espousing his doctrine and making it the current orthodoxy of our times. i wouldn't have written against sir robert, labouring to show his mistakes, inconsistencies, and lack of the biblical proofs that he boasts of having as his only foundation, if there weren't men among us who, by praising his books and accepting his doctrine, clear me of the charge of writing only against a dead adversary. they have been so zealous about this that if i have done him any wrong i can't hope they will show me any mercy. i wish that where they have done wrong to the truth and to the public, they would be as ready to correct it as i am to admit errors proved against me, and that they would give due weight to the thought that the greatest harm one can do to the monarch and the people is to spread wrong notions about government. if they did, it might for ever put an end to our having reason to complain of thunderings from the pulpit! if anyone who is really concerned about truth tries to refute my hypothesis, i promise him either to admit any mistake he fairly convicts me of or to answer his difficulties. but he must remember two things: that picking holes in my discourse objecting to this turn of phrase or that little incident is not the same as answering my book. that i shan't let scolding pass as argument.

i have nothing more, but to advertise the reader, that observations stands for observations on hobbs, milton, &c. and that a bare quotation of pages always means pages of his patriarcha, edition 1680. it having been shewn in the foregoing discourse, that adam had not, either by natural right of fatherhood, or by positive donation from god, any such authority over his children, or dominion over the world, as is pretended: that if he had, his heirs, yet, had no right to it: that if his heirs had, there being no law of nature nor positive law of god that determines which is the right heir in all cases that may arise, the right of succession, and consequently of bearing rule, could not have been certainly determined: that if even that had been determined, yet the knowledge of which is the eldest line of adam's posterity, being so long since utterly lost, that in the races of mankind and families of the world, there remains not to one above another, the least pretence to be the eldest house, and to have the right of inheritance: all these premises having, as i think, been clearly made out, it is impossible that the rulers now on earth should make any benefit, or derive any the least shadow of authority from that, which is held to be the fountain of all power, adam's private dominion and paternal jurisdiction; so that he that will not give just occasion to think that all government in the world is the product only of force and violence, and that men live together by no other rules but that of beasts, where the strongest carries it, and so lay a foundation for perpetual disorder and mischief, tumult, sedition and rebellion, (things that the followers of that hypothesis so loudly cry out against) must of necessity find out another rise of government, another original of political power, and another way of designing and knowing the persons that have it, than what sir robert filmer hath taught us.
in my first treatise of government i showed these four things: (1) that adam did not have, whether by natural right as a father or through a positive gift from god, any such authority over his children or over the world as has been claimed. (2) that if even he had, his heirs would not have the same right. (3) that if the right were to be passed on to his heirs, it would be indeterminate who were his heirs, because there is no law of nature or positive law of god that settles this question in every possible case; so it wouldn't be determinate who inherited the right and thus was entitled to rule. (4) even if all that had been theoretically determined, it would be useless in practice: the knowledge of the chain of heirs running back to adam has been utterly lost, so that nobody in all the races of mankind and families of the world would have the slightest claim to have that supposed right of inheritance. all these premises having, as i think, been clearly established, no rulers now on earth can derive the faintest shadow of authority from the supposed source of all human political power, adam's private dominion and paternal rule. so if you don't want to give reason to think that all government in the world is the product purely of force and violence, and men live together only by the same rules as the lower animals, where strength settles every issue, and so lay a foundation for perpetual disorder and mischief, riots, sedition and rebellion (things that the followers of that force and violence hypothesis so loudly cry out against), you will have to find another account of the beginnings of government, another source for political power, and another way of settling who the people are who ought to have it other, that is, than what sir robert filmer has taught us.

to this purpose, i think it may not be amiss, to set down what i take to be political power; that the power of a magistrate over a subject may be distinguished from that of a father over his children, a master over his servant, a husband over his wife, and a lord over his slave. all which distinct powers happening sometimes together in the same man, if he be considered under these different relations, it may help us to distinguish these powers one from wealth, a father of a family, and a captain of a galley.
for this purpose, i think it may be worthwhile to state what i think political power is; so that the power of a government official over a subject can be distinguished from that of a father over his children, a master over his servant, a husband over his wife, and a lord over his slave. because it sometimes happens that one man has all these different powers, we can get clearer about how the powers differ by looking at the different relationships in which the man stands: as ruler of a commonwealth, father of a family, and captain of a galley.

political power, then, i take to be a right of making laws with penalties of death, and consequently all less penalties, for the regulating and preserving of property, and of employing the force of the community, in the execution of such laws, and in the defence of the commonwealth from foreign injury; and all this only for the public good.
so: i take political power to be a right to make laws with the death penalty and consequently all lesser penalties for regulating and preserving property, and to employ the force of the community in enforcing such laws and defending the commonwealth from external attack; all this being only for the public good.

of the state of nature.
the state of nature

to understand political power right, and derive it from its original, we must consider, what state all men are naturally in, and that is, a state of perfect freedom to order their actions, and dispose of their possessions and persons, as they think fit, within the bounds of the law of nature, without asking leave, or depending upon the will of any other man.
to understand political power correctly and derive it here are his words: from its proper source, we must consider what state all men are naturally in. in this state men are perfectly free a similar natural inducement has led men to realize to order their actions, and dispose of their possessions and that they have as much duty to love others as to love themselves, in any way they like, without asking anyone's themselves. things that are equal must be measured permission subject only to limits set by the law of nature.

a state also of equality, wherein all the power and jurisdiction is reciprocal, no one having more than another; there being nothing more evident, than that creatures of the same species and rank, promiscuously born to all the same advantages of nature, and the use of the same faculties, should also be equal one amongst another without subordination or subjection, unless the lord and master of them all should, by any manifest declaration of his will, set one above another, and confer on him, by an evident and clear appointment, an undoubted right to dominion and sovereignty.
it is also a state of equality, in which no-one has more power and authority than anyone else; because it is simply obvious that creatures of the same species and status, all born to all the same advantages of nature and to the use of the same abilities, should also be equal in other ways, with no-one being subjected to or subordinate to anyone else, unless god, the lord and master of them all, were to declare clearly and explicitly his wish that some one person be raised above the others and given an undoubted right to dominion and sovereignty

this equality of men by nature, the judicious hooker looks upon as so evident in itself, and beyond all question, that he makes it the foundation of that obligation to mutual love amongst men, on which he builds the duties they owe one another, and from whence he derives the great maxims of justice and charity. his words are,
the judicious richard hooker regards this natural me a natural duty to act towards them with the same equality of men as so obvious and unquestionable that he love. everyone knows the rules and canons natural bases on it men's obligation to love one another, on which reason has laid down for the guidance of our lives on he builds their duties towards each other, from which in the basis of this relation of equality between ourselves turn he derives the great maxims of justice and charity. here are his words:

the like natural inducement hath brought men to know that it is no less their duty, to love others than themselves; for seeing those things which are equal, must needs all have one measure; if i cannot but wish to receive good, even as much at every man's hands, as any man can wish unto his own soul, how should i look to have any part of my desire herein satisfied, unless myself be careful to satisfy the like desire, which is undoubtedly in other men, being of one and the same nature? to have any thing offered them repugnant to this desire, must needs in all respects grieve them as much as me; so that if i do harm, i must look to suffer, there being no reason that others should shew greater measure of love to me, than they have by me shewed unto them: my desire therefore to be loved of my equals in nature as much as possible may be, imposeth upon me a natural duty of bearing to them-ward fully the like affection; from which relation of equality between ourselves and them that are as ourselves, what several rules and canons natural reason hath drawn, for direction of life, no man is ignorant, eccl.
a similar natural inducement has led men to realize that they have as much duty to love others as to love themselves. things that are equal must be measured by a single standard; so if i inevitably want to receive some good indeed as much good from every man as any man can want for himself how could i expect to have any part of my desire satisfied if i am not careful to satisfy the similar desires that other men, being all of the same nature, are bound to have? to offer them anything inconsistent with their desire will be to grieve them as much as it would grieve me; so that if i do harm i must expect to suffer, because there is no reason why others should show more love to me than i have shown to them. thus, my desire to be loved as much as possible by my natural equals gives me a natural duty to act towards them with the same love. everyone knows the rules and canons natural reason has laid down for the guidance of our lives on the basis of this relation of equality between ourselves and those who are like us.

but though this be a state of liberty, yet it is not a state of licence: though man in that state have an uncontroulable liberty to dispose of his person or possessions, yet he has not liberty to destroy himself, or so much as any creature in his possession, but where some nobler use than its bare preservation calls for it. the state of nature has a law of nature to govern it, which obliges every one: and reason, which is that law, teaches all mankind, who will but consult it, that being all equal and independent, no one ought to harm another in his life, health, liberty, or possessions: for men being all the workmanship of one omnipotent, and infinitely wise maker; all the servants of one sovereign master, sent into the world by his order, and about his business; they are his property, whose workmanship they are, made to last during his, not one another's pleasure: and being furnished with like faculties, sharing all in one community of nature, there cannot be supposed any such subordination among us, that may authorize us to destroy one another, as if we were made for one another's uses, as the inferior ranks of creatures are for our's. every one, as he is bound to preserve himself, and not to quit his station wilfully, so by the like reason, when his own preservation comes not in competition, ought he, as much as he can, to preserve the rest of mankind, and may not, unless it be to do justice on an offender, take away, or impair the life, or what tends to the preservation of the life, the liberty, health, limb, or goods of another.
but though this is a state of liberty, it isn't a state of licence in which there are no constraints on how people behave. a man in that state is absolutely free to dispose of himself or his possessions, but he isn't at liberty to destroy himself, or even to destroy any created thing in his possession unless its destruction is required for some nobler purpose. the state of nature is governed by a law that creates obligations for everyone. and reason, which is that law, teaches anyone who takes the trouble to consult it, that because we are all equal and independent, no-one ought to harm anyone else in his life, health, liberty, or possessions. this is because we are all the work of one omnipotent and infinitely wise maker; we are all the servants of one sovereign master, sent into the world by his order to do his business; we are all the property of him who made us, and he made us to last as long as he chooses, not as long as we choose; we have the same abilities, and share in one common nature, so there can't be any rank-ordering that would authorize some of us to destroy others, as if we were made to be used by one another, as the lower kinds of creatures are made to be used by us. everyone is obliged to preserve himself and not opt out of life willfully, so for the same reason everyone ought, when his own survival isn't at stake, to do as much as he can to preserve the rest of mankind; and except when it's a matter of punishing an offender, no-one may take away or damage anything that contributes to the preservation of someone else's life, liberty, health, limb, or goods.

and that all men may be restrained from invading others rights, and from doing hurt to one another, and the law of nature be observed, which willeth the peace and preservation of all mankind, the execution of the law of nature is, in that state, put into every man's hands, whereby every one has a right to punish the transgressors of that law to such a degree, as may hinder its violation: for the law of nature would, as all other laws that concern men in this world be in vain, if there were no body that in the state of nature had a power to execute that law, and thereby preserve the innocent and restrain offenders. and if any one in the state of nature may punish another for any evil he has done, every one may do so: for in that state of perfect equality, where naturally there is no superiority or jurisdiction of one over another, what any may do in prosecution of that law, every one must needs have a right to do.
so that all men may be held back from invading the rights of others and from harming one another, and so that the law of nature that aims at the peace and preservation of all mankind may be obeyed, the enforcement of that law of nature (in the state of nature) is in every man's hands, so that everyone has a right to punish law-breakers as severely as is needed to hinder the violation of the law. for the law of nature, like every law concerning men in this world, would be futile if no-one had power to enforce it and thereby preserve the innocent and restrain offenders. and in the state of nature if anyone may punish someone for something bad that he has done, then everyone may do so.

and thus, in the state of nature, one man comes by a power over another; but yet no absolute or arbitrary power, to use a criminal, when he has got him in his hands, according to the passionate heats, or boundless extravagancy of his own will; but only to retribute to him, so far as calm reason and conscience dictate, what is proportionate to his transgression, which is so much as may serve for reparation and restraint: for these two are the only reasons, why one man may lawfully do harm to another, which is that we call punishment. in transgressing the law of nature, the offender declares himself to live by another rule than that of reason and common equity, which is that measure god has set to the actions of men, for their mutual security; and so he becomes dangerous to mankind, the tye, which is to secure them from injury and violence, being slighted and broken by him. which being a trespass against the whole species, and the peace and safety of it, provided for by the law of nature, every man upon this score, by the right he hath to preserve mankind in general, may restrain, or where it is necessary, destroy things noxious to them, and so may bring such evil on any one, who hath transgressed that law, as may make him repent the doing of it, and thereby deter him, and by his example others, from doing the like mischief. and in the case, and upon this ground, every man hath a right to punish the offender, and be executioner of the law of nature.
that is how in a state of nature one man comes to have a legitimate power over another. it isn't an unconditional power, allowing him to use a captured criminal according to the hot frenzy or unbridled extremes of his own will; but only a power to punish him so far as calm reason and conscience say is proportionate to his crime, namely as much punishment as may serve for reparation and restraint for those two are the only reasons why one man may lawfully harm another, which is what we call punishment. by breaking the law of nature, the offender declares himself to live by some rule other than that of reason and common fairness (which is the standard that god has set for the actions of men, for their mutual security); and so he becomes dangerous to mankind because he has disregarded and broken the tie that is meant to secure them from injury and violence. this is an offence against the whole human species, and against the peace and safety that the law of nature provides for the species. now, every man, by the right he has to preserve mankind in general, may restrain and if necessary destroy things that are noxious to mankind; and so he can do to anyone who has transgressed that law as much harm as may make him repent having done it, and thereby deter him and by his example deter others from doing the same. so for this reason every man has a right to enforce the law of nature and punish offenders.

i doubt not but this will seem a very strange doctrine to some men: but before they condemn it, i desire them to resolve me, by what right any prince or state can put to death, or punish an alien, for any crime he commits in their country. it is certain their laws, by virtue of any sanction they receive from the promulgated will of the legislative, reach not a stranger: they speak not to him, nor, if they did, is he bound to hearken to them. the legislative authority, by which they are in force over the subjects of that commonwealth, hath no power over him. those who have the supreme power of making laws in england, france or holland, are to an indian, but like the rest of the world, men without authority: and therefore, if by the law of nature every man hath not a power to punish offences against it, as he soberly judges the case to require, i see not how the magistrates of any community can punish an alien of another country; since, in reference to him, they can have no more power than what every man naturally may have over another.
no doubt this will seem a very strange doctrine to some people; but before they condemn it, i challenge them to explain what right any king or state has to put to death or otherwise punish a foreigner for a crime he commits in their country. the right is certainly not based on their laws, through any permission they get from the announced will of the legislature; for such announcements don't get through to a foreigner: they aren't addressed to him, and even if they were, he isn't obliged to listen. those who have the supreme power of making laws in england, france or holland are to an indian merely like the rest of the world, men without authority. so if the law of nature didn't give every man a power to punish offences against it as he soberly judges the case to require, i don't see how the judiciary of any community can punish someone from another country; because they can't have any more power over him than every man can naturally have over another.

besides the crime which consists in violating the law, and varying from the right rule of reason, whereby a man so far becomes degenerate, and declares himself to quit the principles of human nature, and to be a noxious creature, there is commonly injury done to some person or other, and some other man receives damage by his transgression: in which case he who hath received any damage, has, besides the right of punishment common to him with other men, a particular right to seek reparation from him that has done it: and any other person, who finds it just, may also join with him that is injured, and assist him in recovering from the offender so much as may make satisfaction for the harm he has suffered.
as well as the crime that consists in violating the law and departing from the right rule of reason crime through which man becomes so degenerate that he declares that he is deserting the principles of human nature and becoming vermin there is often transgression through which someone does harm to someone else. in the latter case, the person who has been harmed has, in addition to the general right of punishment that he shares with everyone else, a particular right to seek reparation from the person who harmed him; and anyone else who thinks this just may also join with the injured party and help him to recover from the offender such damages as may make satisfaction for the harm he has suffered.

from these two distinct rights, the one of punishing the crime for restraint, and preventing the like offence, which right of punishing is in every body; the other of taking reparation, which belongs only to the injured party, comes it to pass that the magistrate, who by being magistrate hath the common right of punishing put into his hands, can often, where the public good demands not the execution of the law, remit the punishment of criminal offences by his own authority, but yet cannot remit the satisfaction due to any private man for the damage he has received. that, he who has suffered the damage has a right to demand in his own name, and he alone can remit: the damnified person has this power of appropriating to himself the goods or service of the offender, by right of self-preservation, as every man has a power to punish the crime, to prevent its being committed again, by the right he has of preserving all mankind, and doing all reasonable things he can in order to that end: and thus it is, that every man, in the state of nature, has a power to kill a murderer, both to deter others from doing the like injury, which no reparation can compensate, by the example of the punishment that attends it from every body, and also to secure men from the attempts of a criminal, who having renounced reason, the common rule and measure god hath given to mankind, hath, by the unjust violence and slaughter he hath committed upon one, declared war against all mankind, and therefore may be destroyed as a lion or a tyger, one of those wild savage beasts, with whom men can have no society nor security: and upon this is grounded that great law of nature, whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. and cain was so fully convinced, that every one had a right to destroy such a criminal, that after the murder of his brother, he cries out, every one that findeth me, shall slay me; so plain was it writ in the hearts of all mankind.
so there are two distinct rights: (i) the right that everyone has, to punish the criminal so as to restrain him and prevent such offences in future; (ii) the right that an injured party has to get reparation. now, a magistrate, who by being magistrate has the common right of punishing put into his hands, can by his own authority (i) cancel the punishment of a criminal offence in a case where the public good doesn't demand that the law be enforced; but he can't (ii) cancel the satisfaction due to any private man for the damage he has received. the only one who can do that is the person who has been harmed. the injured party has the power of taking for himself the goods or service of the offender, by right of self-preservation; and everyone has a power to punish the crime to prevent its being committed again, by the right he has of preserving all mankind, and doing everything reasonable that he can to that end. and so it is that in the state of nature everyone has a power to kill a murderer, both to deter others from this crime that no reparation can make up for, by the example of the punishment that everyone inflicts for it, and also to secure men from future crimes by this criminal; the murderer has renounced reason, the common rule and standard god has given to mankind, and by the unjust violence and slaughter he has committed on one person he has declared war against all mankind, so that he can be destroyed as though he were a lion or a tiger. this is the basis for the great law of nature, whoever sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. cain was so fully convinced that everyone had a right to destroy such a criminal that after murdering his brother he cried out anyone who finds me will slay me so plainly was this law written in the hearts of all mankind.

by the same reason may a man in the state of nature punish the lesser breaches of that law. it will perhaps be demanded, with death? i answer, each transgression may be punished to that degree, and with so much severity, as will suffice to make it an ill bargain to the offender, give him cause to repent, and terrify others from doing the like. every offence, that can be committed in the state of nature, may in the state of nature be also punished equally, and as far forth as it may, in a commonwealth: for though it would be besides my present purpose, to enter here into the particulars of the law of nature, or its measures of punishment; yet, it is certain there is such a law, and that too, as intelligible and plain to a rational creature, and a studier of that law, as the positive laws of commonwealths; nay, possibly plainer; as much as reason is easier to be understood, than the fancies and intricate contrivances of men, following contrary and hidden interests put into words; for so truly are a great part of the municipal laws of countries, which are only so far right, as they are founded on the law of nature, by which they are to be regulated and interpreted.
for the same reason a man in the state of nature may punish lesser breaches of the law of nature. by death? you may ask. i answer that each offence may be punished severely enough to make it a bad bargain for the offender, to give him reason to repent, and to terrify others from offending in the same way. every offence that can be committed in the state of nature may also be punished in the state of nature and punished in the same way (as far as possible) as it would be in a commonwealth. i don't want to go into the details of the law of nature or of its punitive measures, but i will say this much:- it is certain that there is a law of nature, which is as intelligible and plain to a reasonable person who studies it as are the positive laws of commonwealths. it may even be plainer as much plainer as reason is plainer, easier to understand, than the fancies and intricate theoretical contrivances of men who have tried to find words that will further their conflicting hidden interests. for that is what has gone into the devising of most of the legislated laws of countries. really, such laws are right only to the extent that they are founded on the law of nature, which is the standard by which they should be applied and interpreted.

to this strange doctrine, viz. that in the state of nature every one has the executive power of the law of nature, i doubt not but it will be objected, that it is unreasonable for men to be judges in their own cases, that self-love will make men partial to themselves and their friends: and on the other side, that ill nature, passion and revenge will carry them too far in punishing others; and hence nothing but confusion and disorder will follow, and that therefore god hath certainly appointed government to restrain the partiality and violence of men. i easily grant, that civil government is the proper remedy for the inconveniencies of the state of nature, which must certainly be great, where men may be judges in their own case, since it is easy to be imagined, that he who was so unjust as to do his brother an injury, will scarce be so just as to condemn himself for it: but i shall desire those who make this objection, to remember, that absolute monarchs are but men; and if government is to be the remedy of those evils, which necessarily follow from men's being judges in their own cases, and the state of nature is therefore not to be endured, i desire to know what kind of government that is, and how much better it is than the state of nature, where one man, commanding a multitude, has the liberty to be judge in his own case, and may do to all his subjects whatever he pleases, without the least liberty to any one to question or controul those who execute his pleasure? and in whatsoever he doth, whether led by reason, mistake or passion, must be submitted to? much better it is in the state of nature, wherein men are not bound to submit to the unjust will of another: and if he that judges, judges amiss in his own, or any other case, he is answerable for it to the rest of mankind.
to this strange doctrine of mine, namely that in the state of nature everyone has the power to enforce the law of nature, i expect this objection to be raised: it is unreasonable for men to be judges in their own cases, because self- love will bias men in favour of themselves and their friends. and on the other side, hostility, passion and revenge will lead them to punish others too severely. so nothing but confusion and disorder will follow, and that is why god has as he certainly has established government to restrain the partiality and violence of men. i freely allow that civil government is the proper remedy for the drawbacks of the state of nature. there must certainly be great disadvantages in a state where men may be judges in their own case; someone who was so unjust as to do his brother an injury will (we may well suppose) hardly be so just as to condemn himself for it! but i respond to the objector as follows:- if the state of nature is intolerable because of the evils that are bound to follow from men's being judges in their own cases, and government is to be the remedy for this, let us do a comparison. on the one side there is the state of nature; on the other there is government where one man and remember that absolute monarchs are only men! commands a multitude, is free to be the judge in his own case, and can do what he likes to all his subjects, with no-one being allowed to question or control those who carry out his wishes, and everyone having to put up with whatever he does, whether he is led by reason, mistake or passion. how much better it is in the state of nature, where no man is obliged to submit to the unjust will of someone else, and someone who judges wrongly (whether or not it is in his own case) is answerable for that to the rest of mankind!

it is often asked as a mighty objection, where are, or ever were there any men in such a state of nature? to which it may suffice as an answer at present, that since all princes and rulers of independent governments all through the world, are in a state of nature, it is plain the world never was, nor ever will be, without numbers of men in that state. i have named all governors of independent communities, whether they are, or are not, in league with others: for it is not every compact that puts an end to the state of nature between men, but only this one of agreeing together mutually to enter into one community, and make one body politic; other promises, and compacts, men may make one with another, and yet still be in the state of nature. the promises and bargains for truck, &c. between the two men in the desert island, mentioned by garcilasso de la vega, in his history of peru; or between a swiss and an indian, in the woods of america, are binding to them, though they are perfectly in a state of nature, in reference to one another: for truth and keeping of faith belongs to men, as men, and not as members of society.
it is often asked, as though this were a mighty objection: where are there where ever were there any men in such a state of nature? here is an answer that may suffice in the mean time:- the world always did and always will have many men in the state of nature, because all monarchs and rulers of independent governments throughout the world are in that state. i include in this all who govern independent communities, whether or not they are in league with others; for the state of nature between men isn't ended just by their making a pact with one another. the only pact that ends the state of nature is one in which men agree together mutually to enter into one community and make one body politic. the promises and bargains involved in bartering between two men on a desert island, or between a swiss and an indian in the woods of america, are binding on them even though they are perfectly in a state of nature in relation to one another; for truth and promise-keeping belongs to men as men, not as members of society i.e. as a matter of natural law, not positive law.

to those that say, there were never any men in the state of nature, i will not only oppose the authority of the judicious hooker
to those who deny that anyone was ever in the state of nature, i oppose the authority of the judicious hooker, who writes:

the laws which have been hitherto mentioned, i.e. the laws of nature, do bind men absolutely, even as they are men, although they have never any settled fellowship, never any solemn agreement amongst themselves what to do, or not to do: but forasmuch as we are not by ourselves sufficient to furnish ourselves with competent store of things, needful for such a life as our nature doth desire, a life fit for the dignity of man; therefore to supply those defects and imperfections which are in us, as living single and solely by ourselves, we are naturally induced to seek communion and fellowship with others: this was the cause of men's uniting themselves at first in politic societies.
the laws of nature bind men absolutely, just as men, even if they have no settled fellowship, no solemn agreement among themselves about what to do and what not to do. what naturally leads us to seek communion and fellowship with other people is the fact that on our own we haven't the means to provide ourselves with an adequate store of things that we need for the kind of life our nature desires, a life fit for the dignity of man. it was to make up for those defects and imperfections of the solitary life that men first united themselves in politic societies. (the laws of ecclesiastical polity, bk 1, sect. 10)

but i moreover affirm, that all men are naturally in that state, and remain so, till by their own consents they make themselves members of some politic society; and i doubt not in the sequel of this discourse, to make it very clear.
and i also affirm that all men are naturally in the state of nature, and remain so until they consent to make themselves members of some political society. i expect to make all this very clear in later parts of this discourse.

of the state of war.
the state of war

the state of war is a state of enmity and destruction: and therefore declaring by word or action, not a passionate and hasty, but a sedate settled design upon another man's life, puts him in a state of war with him against whom he has declared such an intention, and so has exposed his life to the other's power to be taken away by him, or any one that joins with him in his defence, and espouses his quarrel; it being reasonable and just, i should have a right to destroy that which threatens me with destruction: for, by the fundamental law of nature, man being to be preserved as much as possible, when all cannot be preserved, the safety of the innocent is to be preferred: and one may destroy a man who makes war upon him, or has discovered an enmity to his being, for the same reason that he may kill a wolf or a lion; because such men are not under the ties of the commonlaw of reason, have no other rule, but that of force and violence, and so may be treated as beasts of prey, those dangerous and noxious creatures, that will be sure to destroy him whenever he falls into their power.
the state of war is a state of enmity and destruction. so when someone declares by word or action not in a sudden outburst of rage, but as a matter of calm settled design that he intends to end another man's life, he puts himself into a state of war against the other person; and he thereby exposes his life to the risk of falling into the power of the other person or anyone that joins with him in his defence and takes up his quarrel. for it is reasonable and just that i should have a right to destroy anything that threatens me with destruction, because the fundamental law of nature says that men are to be preserved as much as possible, and that when not everyone can be preserved the safety of the innocent is to be preferred. in line with this, i may destroy a man who makes war on me or has revealed himself as an enemy to my life, for the same reason that i may kill a wolf or a lion; because such men are not under the ties of the common law of reason, have no rule except that of force and violence, and so may be treated as beasts of prey dangerous creatures that will certainly destroy me if i fall into their power.

and hence it is, that he who attempts to get another man into his absolute power, does thereby put himself into a state of war with him; it being to be understood as a declaration of a design upon his life: for i have reason to conclude, that he who would get me into his power without my consent, would use me as he pleased when he had got me there, and destroy me too when he had a fancy to it; for no body can desire to have me in his absolute power, unless it be to compel me by force to that which is against the right of my freedom, i.e. make me a slave. to be free from such force is the only security of my preservation; and reason bids me look on him, as an enemy to my preservation, who would take away that freedom which is the fence to it; so that he who makes an attempt to enslave me, thereby puts himself into a state of war with me. he that, in the state of nature, would take away the freedom that belongs to any one in that state, must necessarily be supposed to have a design to take away every thing else, that freedom being the foundation of all the rest; as he that, in the state of society, would take away the freedom belonging to those of that society or commonwealth, must be supposed to design to take away from them every thing else, and so be looked on as in a state of war.
so it comes about that someone who tries to get another man into his absolute power thereby puts himself into a state of war with the other, for such an attempt amounts to a declaration of a plan against the life of the other man. if someone wants to get me into his power without my consent, i have reason to conclude that he would use me as he pleased when he had got me there, and would destroy me if he wanted to; for no-one can want to have me in his absolute power unless it's to compel me by force to something that is against the right of my freedom, i.e. to make me a slave. to be sure of my own survival i must be free from such force; and reason tells me to look on him the person who wants me in his power as an enemy to my survival, wanting to take away the freedom that is the fence to it. so someone who tries to enslave me thereby puts himself into a state of war with me. someone wants to take away the freedom of someone else must be supposed to have a plan to take away everything else from the person, because freedom is the foundation of all the rest; and that holds in a commonwealth as well as in the state of nature.

this makes it lawful for a man to kill a thief, who has not in the least hurt him, nor declared any design upon his life, any farther than, by the use of force, so to get him in his power, as to take away his money, or what he pleases, from him; because using force, where he has no right, to get me into his power, let his pretence be what it will, i have no reason to suppose, that he, who would take away my liberty, would not, when he had me in his power, take away every thing else. and therefore it is lawful for me to treat him as one who has put himself into a state of war with me, i.e. kill him if i can; for to that hazard does he justly expose himself, whoever introduces a state of war, and is aggressor in it.
this makes it lawful for me to kill a thief who hasn't done me any harm or declared any plan against my life, other than using force to get me in his power so as to take away my money or whatever else he wants. no matter what he claims he is up to, he is using force without right, to get me into his power; so i have no reason to think that he won't, when he has me in his power, take everything else away from me as well as my liberty. so it is lawful for me to treat him as someone who has put himself into a state of war with me, i.e. to kill him if i can; for that is the risk he ran when he started a war in which he is the aggressor.

and here we have the plain difference between the state of nature and the state of war, which however some men have confounded, are as far distant, as a state of peace, good will, mutual assistance and preservation, and a state of enmity, malice, violence and mutual destruction, are one from another. men living together according to reason, without a common superior on earth, with authority to judge between them, is properly the state of nature. but force, or a declared design of force, upon the person of another, where there is no common superior on earth to appeal to for relief, is the state of war: and it is the want of such an appeal gives a man the right of war even against an aggressor, tho he be in society and a fellow subject. thus a thief, whom i cannot harm, but by appeal to the law, for having stolen all that i am worth, i may kill, when he sets on me to rob me but of my horse or coat; because the law, which was made for my preservation, where it cannot interpose to secure my life from present force, which, if lost, is capable of no reparation, permits me my own defence, and the right of war, a liberty to kill the aggressor, because the aggressor allows not time to appeal to our common judge, nor the decision of the law, for remedy in a case where the mischief may be irreparable. want of a common judge with authority, puts all men in a state of nature: force without right, upon a man's person, makes a state of war, both where there is, and is not, a common judge.
this is the plain difference between the state of nature and the state of war. some men notably hobbes have treated them as the same; but in fact they are as distant from one another as a state of peace, good will, mutual assistance and preservation is distant from a state of enmity, malice, violence and mutual destruction. a state of nature, properly understood, involves men living together according to reason, with no-one on earth who stands above them all and has authority to judge between them.

but when the actual force is over, the state of war ceases between those that are in society, and are equally on both sides subjected to the fair determination of the law; because then there lies open the remedy of appeal for the past injury, and to prevent future harm: but where no such appeal is, as in the state of nature, for want of positive laws, and judges with authority to appeal to, the state of war once begun, continues, with a right to the innocent party to destroy the other whenever he can, until the aggressor offers peace, and desires reconciliation on such terms as may repair any wrongs he has already done, and secure the innocent for the future; nay, where an appeal to the law, and constituted judges, lies open, but the remedy is denied by a manifest perverting of justice, and a barefaced wresting of the laws to protect or indemnify the violence or injuries of some men, or party of men, there it is hard to imagine any thing but a state of war: for wherever violence is used, and injury done, though by hands appointed to administer justice, it is still violence and injury, however coloured with the name, pretences, or forms of law, the end whereof being to protect and redress the innocent, by an unbiassed application of it, to all who are under it; wherever that is not bona fide done, war is made upon the sufferers, who having no appeal on earth to right them, they are left to the only remedy in such cases, an appeal to heaven.
it is the lack of such an appeal that gives a man the right of war against an aggressor, not only in a state of nature but even if they are both subjects in a single society. if a thief has already stolen all that i am worth and is not a continuing threat to me, i may not harm him except through an appeal to the law. but if he is now setting on me to rob me even if it's just my horse or my coat that he is after i may kill him. there is the law, which was made for my protection, but there is no time for it to intervene to save me from losing my goods and perhaps losing my life (and if i lose that there is no reparation). furthermore, it is the thief's fault that there is no time for an appeal to the judge that stands over him and me namely, the law and so i am allowed to make my own defence, and to be at war with the thief and to kill him if i can. what puts men into a state of nature is the lack of a common judge who has authority; the use of unlawful force against a man's person creates a state of war, whether or not there is a common judge and (therefore) whether or not they are in a state of nature. but for men who are in a society under a government, the state of war ends when the actual force ends; and then those on each side of the trouble should equally submit to the fair determination of the law. but in the state of nature, where there are no positive laws or judges with authority to appeal to, once a state of war has begun it continues with the innocent party having a right to destroy the other if he can until the aggressor offers peace, and seeks reconciliation on terms that will make up for any wrongs he has done and will give the innocent person security from then on. what if the situation is like this? there is time and opportunity for an appeal to the law, and to legally constituted judges, but the remedy is not available because of a manifest perverting of justice, a barefaced twisting of the laws so that they protect or even reward the violence or injuries perpetrated by some men or some party of men. in such a case it is hard to think we have anything but a state of war. for wherever violence is used and injury done, even if it is done by people appointed to administer justice and is dressed up in the name, claims, or forms of law, it is still violence and injury. the purpose of the law is to protect and get compensation for the innocent, by an unbiased treatment of all who come under it; and when this is not genuinely done, war is made upon the sufferers, and they having nowhere on earth to appeal to for justice are left to the only remedy in such cases, an appeal to heaven.

to avoid this state of war (wherein there is no appeal but to heaven, and wherein every the least difference is apt to end, where there is no authority to decide between the contenders) is one great reason of men's putting themselves into society, and quitting the state of nature: for where there is an authority, a power on earth, from which relief can be had by appeal, there the continuance of the state of war is excluded, and the controversy is decided by that power. had there been any such court, any superior jurisdiction on earth, to determine the right between jephtha and the ammonites, they had never come to a state of war: but we see he was forced to appeal to heaven. the lord the judge (says he) be judge this day between the children of israel and the children of ammon, judg. and then prosecuting, and relying on his appeal, he leads out his army to battle: and therefore in such controversies, where the question is put, who shall be judge? it cannot be meant, who shall decide the controversy; every one knows what jephtha here tells us, that the lord the judge shall judge. where there is no judge on earth, the appeal lies to god in heaven. that question then cannot mean, who shall judge, whether another hath put himself in a state of war with me, and whether i may, as jephtha did, appeal to heaven in it? of that i myself can only be judge in my own conscience, as i will answer it, at the great day, to the supreme judge of all men.
in a state of nature where there is no authority to decide between contenders, and the only appeal is to heaven, every little difference is apt to end up in war; and that is one great reason for men to put themselves into society, and leave the state of nature. for where there is an authority, a power on earth from which relief can be had by appeal, the controversy is decided by that power and the state of war is blocked.

of slavery.
slavery

the natural liberty of man is to be free from any superior power on earth, and not to be under the will or legislative authority of man, but to have only the law of nature for his rule. the liberty of man, in society, is to be under no other legislative power, but that established, by consent, in the commonwealth; nor under the dominion of any will, or restraint of any law, but what that legislative shall enact, according to the trust put in it. freedom then is not what sir robert filmer tells us, observations, a. 55. a liberty for every one to do what he lists, to live as he pleases, and not to be tied by any laws: but freedom of men under government is, to have a standing rule to live by, common to every one of that society, and made by the legislative power erected in it; a liberty to follow my own will in all things, where the rule prescribes not; and not to be subject to the inconstant, uncertain, unknown, arbitrary will of another man: as freedom of nature is, to be under no other restraint but the law of nature.
the natural liberty of man is to be free from any superior power on earth, and not to be under the will or legislative authority of men but to be ruled only by the law of nature. the liberty of man in society is to be under no legislative power except the one established by consent in the commonwealth; and not under the power of any will or under restraint from any law except what is enacted by the legislature in accordance with its mandate. freedom then is not what sir robert filmer tells us (observations on hobbes, milton, etc.), namely a liberty for everyone to do what he wants, live as he pleases, and not be tied by any laws. rather, freedom is one of two things. freedom of nature is being under no restraint except the law of nature. freedom of men under government is having a standing rule to live by, common to everyone in the society in question, and made by the legislative power that has been set up in it; a liberty to follow one's own will in anything that isn't forbidden by the rule, and not to be subject to the inconstant, uncertain, unknown, arbitrary will of another man.

this freedom from absolute, arbitrary power, is so necessary to, and closely joined with a man's preservation, that he cannot part with it, but by what forfeits his preservation and life together: for a man, not having the power of his own life, cannot, by compact, or his own consent, enslave himself to any one, nor put himself under the absolute, arbitrary power of another, to take away his life, when he pleases. no body can give more power than he has himself; and he that cannot take away his own life, cannot give another power over it. indeed, having by his fault forfeited his own life, by some act that deserves death; he, to whom he has forfeited it, may (when he has him in his power) delay to take it, and make use of him to his own service, and he does him no injury by it: for, whenever he finds the hardship of his slavery outweigh the value of his life, it is in his power, by resisting the will of his master, to draw on himself the death he desires.
this freedom from absolute, arbitrary power, is so necessary to a man's survival, so tightly tied to it, that losing it involves losing all control over his own life. that's why no-one can voluntarily enter into slavery. a man doesn't have the power to take his own life, so he can't voluntarily enslave himself to anyone, or put himself under the absolute, arbitrary power of someone else to take away his life whenever he pleases. nobody can give more power than he has; so someone who cannot take away his own life cannot give someone else such a power over it. if someone performs an act that deserves death, he has by his own fault forfeited his own life; the person to whom he has forfeited it may (when he has him in his power) delay taking it and instead make use of the offending man for his own purposes; and this isn't doing him any wrong, because whenever he finds the hardship of his slavery to outweigh the value of his life, he has the power to resist the will of his master, thus bringing the death that he wants.

this is the perfect condition of slavery, which is nothing else, but the state of war continued, between a lawful conqueror and a captive: for, if once compact enter between them, and make an agreement for a limited power on the one side, and obedience on the other, the state of war and slavery ceases, as long as the compact endures: for, as has been said, no man can, by agreement, pass over to another that which he hath not in himself, a power over his own life.
what i have been discussing is the condition of complete slavery, which is just a continuation of the state of war between a lawful conqueror and a captive. if they enter into any kind of pact agreeing to limited power on the one side and obedience on the other the state of war and slavery ceases for as long as the pact is in effect. for, as i have said, no man can by an agreement pass over to someone else something that he doesn't himself have, namely a power over his own life.

i confess, we find among the jews, as well as other nations, that men did sell themselves; but, it is plain, this was only to drudgery, not to slavery: for, it is evident, the person sold was not under an absolute, arbitrary, despotical power: for the master could not have power to kill him, at any time, whom, at a certain time, he was obliged to let go free out of his service; and the master of such a servant was so far from having an arbitrary power over his life, that he could not, at pleasure, so much as maim him, but the loss of an eye, or tooth, set him free, exod. xxi.
i admit that we find among the jews, as well as other nations, cases where men sold themselves; but clearly they sold themselves only into drudgery, not slavery. it is evident that the person who was sold wasn't thereby put at the mercy of an absolute, arbitrary, despotic power; for the master was obliged at a certain time to let the other go free from his service, and so he couldn't at any time have the power to kill him. indeed the master of this kind of servant was so far from having an arbitrary power over his life that he couldn't arbitrarily even maim him: the loss of an eye or a tooth set him free (exodus xxi).

of property.
property

whether we consider natural reason, which tells us, that men, being once born, have a right to their preservation, and consequently to meat and drink, and such other things as nature affords for their subsistence: or revelation, which gives us an account of those grants god made of the world to adam, and to noah, and his sons, it is very clear, that god, as king david says, psal. cxv. 16. has given the earth to the children of men; given it to mankind in common. but this being supposed, it seems to some a very great difficulty, how any one should ever come to have a property in any thing: i will not content myself to answer, that if it be difficult to make out property, upon a supposition that god gave the world to adam, and his posterity in common, it is impossible that any man, but one universal monarch, should have any property upon a supposition, that god gave the world to adam, and his heirs in succession, exclusive of all the rest of his posterity. but i shall endeavour to shew, how men might come to have a property in several parts of that which god gave to mankind in common, and that without any express compact of all the commoners.
god, as king david says (psalms cxv.16), has given the earth to the children of men given it to mankind in common. this is clear, whether we consider natural reason, which tells us that men, once they are born, have a right to survive and thus a right to food and drink and such other things as nature provides for their subsistence, or revelation, which gives us an account of the grants that god made of the world to adam and to noah and his sons. some people think that this creates a great difficulty about how anyone should ever come to own anything. i might answer that difficulty with another difficulty, saying that if the supposition that god gave the world to adam and his posterity in common makes it hard to see how there can be any individual ownership, the supposition that god gave the world to adam and his successive heirs, excluding all the rest of his posterity makes it hard to see how anything can be owned except by one universal monarch. but i shan't rest content with that, and will try to show in a positive way how men could come to own various particular parts of something that god gave to mankind in common, and how this could come about without any explicit agreement among men in general.

god, who hath given the world to men in common, hath also given them reason to make use of it to the best advantage of life, and convenience. the earth, and all that is therein, is given to men for the support and comfort of their being. and tho all the fruits it naturally produces, and beasts it feeds, belong to mankind in common, as they are produced by the spontaneous hand of nature; and no body has originally a private dominion, exclusive of the rest of mankind, in any of them, as they are thus in their natural state: yet being given for the use of men, there must of necessity be a means to appropriate them some way or other, before they can be of any use, or at all beneficial to any particular man. the fruit, or venison, which nourishes the wild indian, who knows no enclosure, and is still a tenant in common, must be his, and so his, i.e. a part of him, that another can no longer have any right to it, before it can do him any good for the support of his life.
god, who has given the world to men in common, has also given them reason to make use of it to the best advantage of life and convenience. the earth and everything in it is given to men for the support and comfort of their existence. all the fruits it naturally produces and animals that it feeds, as produced by the spontaneous hand of nature, belong to mankind in common; nobody has a basic right a private right that excludes the rest of mankind over any of them as they are in their natural state. but they were given for the use of men; and before they can be useful or beneficial to any particular man there must be some way for a particular man to appropriate them. the wild indians in north america don't have fences or boundaries, and are still joint tenants of their territory; but if any one of them is to get any benefit from fruit or venison, the food in question must be his and his (i.e. a part of him) in such a way that no-one else retains any right to it.

though the earth, and all inferior creatures, be common to all men, yet every man has a property in his own person: this no body has any right to but himself. the labour of his body, and the work of his hands, we may say, are properly his. whatsoever then he removes out of the state that nature hath provided, and left it in, he hath mixed his labour with, and joined to it something that is his own, and thereby makes it his property. it being by him removed from the common state nature hath placed it in, it hath by this labour something annexed to it, that excludes the common right of other men: for this labour being the unquestionable property of the labourer, no man but he can have a right to what that is once joined to, at least where there is enough, and as good, left in common for others.
though men as a whole own the earth and all inferior creatures, every individual man has a property in his own person; this is something that nobody else has any right to. the labour of his body and the work of his hands, we may say, are strictly his. so when he takes something from the state that nature has provided and left it in, he mixes his labour with it, thus joining to it something that is his own; and in that way he makes it his property. he has removed the item from the common state that nature has placed it in, and through this labour the item has had annexed to it something that excludes the common right of other men: for this labour is unquestionably the property of the labourer, so no other man can have a right to anything the labour is joined to at least where there is enough, and as good, left in common for others.

he that is nourished by the acorns he picked up under an oak, or the apples he gathered from the trees in the wood, has certainly appropriated them to himself. no body can deny but the nourishment is his. i ask then, when did they begin to be his? when he digested? or when he eat? or when he boiled? or when he brought them home? or when he picked them up? and it is plain, if the first gathering made them not his, nothing else could. that labour put a distinction between them and common: that added something to them more than nature, the common mother of all, had done; and so they became his private right. and will any one say, he had no right to those acorns or apples, he thus appropriated, because he had not the consent of all mankind to make them his? was it a robbery thus to assume to himself what belonged to all in common? if such a consent as that was necessary, man had starved, notwithstanding the plenty god had given him. we see in commons, which remain so by compact, that it is the taking any part of what is common, and removing it out of the state nature leaves it in, which begins the property; without which the common is of no use. and the taking of this or that part, does not depend on the express consent of all the commoners. thus the grass my horse has bit; the turfs my servant has cut; and the ore i have digged in any place, where i have a right to them in common with others, become my property, without the assignation or consent of any body. the labour that was mine, removing them out of that common state they were in, hath fixed my property in them.
someonewho eats the acorns he picked up under an oak, or the apples he gathered from the trees in the forest, has certainly appropriated them to himself! nobody can deny that the nourishment is his. well, then, when did they begin to be his? when he digested them? when he cooked them? when he brought them home? when he picked them up under the tree? it is obvious that if his first gathering didn't make them his, nothing else could do so. that labour marked those things off from the rest of the world's contents; it added something to them beyond what they had been given by nature, the common mother of all; and so they became his private right. suppose we denied this, and said instead: he had no right to the acorns or apples that he thus appropriated, because he didn't have the consent of all mankind to make them his. it was robbery on his part to take for himself something that belonged to all men in common. if such a consent as that was necessary, men in general would have starved, notwithstanding the plenty god had provided them with. we see the thesis i am defending at work in our own society. when there is some land that has the status of a common being held in common by the community by agreement among them taking any part of what is common and removing it from the state nature leaves it in creates ownership; and if it didn't, the common would be of no use. and the taking of this or that part doesn't depend on the express consent of all the commoners. thus when my horse bites off some grass, my servant cuts turf, or i dig up ore, in any place where i have a right to these in common with others, the grass or turf or ore becomes my property, without anyone's giving it to me or consenting to my having it. my labour in removing it out of the common state it was in has established me as its owner.

by making an explicit consent of every commoner, necessary to any one's appropriating to himself any part of what is given in common, children or servants could not cut the meat, which their father or master had provided for them in common, without assigning to every one his peculiar part. though the water running in the fountain be every one's, yet who can doubt, but that in the pitcher is his only who drew it out? his labour hath taken it out of the hands of nature, where it was common, and belonged equally to all her children, and hath thereby appropriated it to himself.
if the explicit consent of every commoner was needed for anyone to appropriate to himself any part of what is given in common, children couldn't cut into the meat their father had provided for them in common without saying which child was to have which portion. the water running in the fountain is everyone's, but who would doubt that the water in the pitcher belongs to the person who drew it out?.

thus this law of reason makes the deer that indian's who hath killed it; it is allowed to be his goods, who hath bestowed his labour upon it, though before it was the common right of every one. and amongst those who are counted the civilized part of mankind, who have made and multiplied positive laws to determine property, this original law of nature, for the beginning of property, in what was before common, still takes place; and by virtue thereof, what fish any one catches in the ocean, that great and still remaining common of mankind; or what ambergrise any one takes up here, is by the labour that removes it out of that common state nature left it in, made his property, who takes that pains about it. and even amongst us, the hare that any one is hunting, is thought his who pursues her during the chase: for being a beast that is still looked upon as common, and no man's private possession; whoever has employed so much labour about any of that kind, as to find and pursue her, has thereby removed her from the state of nature, wherein she was common, and hath begun a property.
thus this law of reason makes it the case that the indian who kills a deer owns it; it is agreed to belong to the person who put his labour into it, even though until then it was the common right of everyone. those who are counted as the civilized part of mankind have made and multiplied positive laws to settle property rights; but even among us this original law of nature the law governing how property starts when everything is held in common still applies.

it will perhaps be objected to this, that if gathering the acorns, or other fruits of the earth, &c. makes a right to them, then any one may ingross as much as he will. to which i answer, not so. the same law of nature, that does by this means give us property, does also bound that property too. god has given us all things richly, 1 tim. vi. 12. is the voice of reason confirmed by inspiration. but how far has he given it us? to enjoy. as much as any one can make use of to any advantage of life before it spoils, so much he may by his labour fix a property in: whatever is beyond this, is more than his share, and belongs to others. nothing was made by god for man to spoil or destroy. and thus, considering the plenty of natural provisions there was a long time in the world, and the few spenders; and to how small a part of that provision the industry of one man could extend itself, and ingross it to the prejudice of others; especially keeping within the bounds, set by reason, of what might serve for his use; there could be then little room for quarrels or contentions about property so established.
you may object that if gathering the acorns etc. creates a right to them, then anyone may hoard as much as he likes. i answer: not so. the very law of nature that in this way gives us property also sets limits to that property. god has given us all things richly. but how far has he given them to us? to enjoy. anyone can through his labour come to own as much as he can use in a beneficial way before it spoils; anything beyond this is more than his share and belongs to others. nothing was made by god for man to spoil or destroy. for a long time there could be little room for quarrels or contentions about property established on this basis: there was an abundance of natural provisions and few users of them; and only a small part of that abundance could be marked off by the industry of one man and hoarded up to the disadvantage of others especially keeping within the bounds (set by reason) of what he could actually use.

but the chief matter of property being now not the fruits of the earth, and the beasts that subsist on it, but the earth itself; as that which takes in and carries with it all the rest; i think it is plain, that property in that too is acquired as the former. as much land as a man tills, plants, improves, cultivates, and can use the product of, so much is his property. he by his labour does, as it were, inclose it from the common. nor will it invalidate his right, to say every body else has an equal title to it; and therefore he cannot appropriate, he cannot inclose, without the consent of all his fellow-commoners, all mankind. god, when he gave the world in common to all mankind, commanded man also to labour, and the penury of his condition required it of him. god and his reason commanded him to subdue the earth, i.e. improve it for the benefit of life, and therein lay out something upon it that was his own, his labour. he that in obedience to this command of god, subdued, tilled and sowed any part of it, thereby annexed to it something that was his property, which another had no title to, nor could without injury take from him.
but these days the chief issue about property concerns the earth itself rather than the plants and animals that live on it, because when you own some of the earth you own what lives on it as well. i think it is clear that ownership of land is acquired in the same way that i have been describing. a man owns whatever land he tills, plants, improves, cultivates, and can use the products of. by his labour he as it were fences off that land from all that is held in common. suppose someone objected: he has no valid right to the land, because everyone else has an equal title to it. so he can't appropriate it, he can't fence it off, without the consent of all his fellow-commoners, all mankind. that is wrong. when god gave the world in common to all mankind, he commanded man to work, and man needed to work in order to survive. so god and his reason commanded man to subdue the earth, i.e. to improve it for the benefit of life; and in doing that he expended something that was his own, namely his labour. a man who in obedience to this command of god subdued, tilled and sowed any part of the earth's surface thereby joined to that land something that was his property, something that no-one else had any title to or could rightfully take from him.

nor was this appropriation of any parcel of land, by improving it, any prejudice to any other man, since there was still enough, and as good left; and more than the yet unprovided could use. so that, in effect, there was never the less left for others because of his enclosure for himself: for he that leaves as much as another can make use of, does as good as take nothing at all. no body could think himself injured by the drinking of another man, though he took a good draught, who had a whole river of the same water left him to quench his thirst: and the case of land and water, where there is enough of both, is perfectly the same.
this appropriation of a plot of land by improving it wasn't done at the expense of any other man, because there was still enough (and as good) left for others more than enough for the use of the people who weren't yet provided for. in effect, the man who by his labour fenced off some land didn't reduce the amount of land that was left for everyone else: someone who leaves as much as anyone else can make use of does as good as take nothing at all. nobody could think he had been harmed by someone else's taking a long drink of water, if there was the whole river of the same water left for him to quench his thirst; and the ownership issues concerning land and water, where there is enough of both, are exactly the same.

god gave the world to men in common; but since he gave it them for their benefit, and the greatest conveniencies of life they were capable to draw from it, it cannot be supposed he meant it should always remain common and uncultivated. he gave it to the use of the industrious and rational, (and labour was to be his title to it;) not to the fancy or covetousness of the quarrelsome and contentious. he that had as good left for his improvement, as was already taken up, needed not complain, ought not to meddle with what was already improved by another's labour: if he did, it is plain he desired the benefit of another's pains, which he had no right to, and not the ground which god had given him in common with others to labour on, and whereof there was as good left, as that already possessed, and more than he knew what to do with, or his industry could reach to.
god gave the world to men in common; but since he gave it them for their benefit and for the greatest conveniences of life they could get from it, he can't have meant it always to remain common and uncultivated. he gave it for the use of the reasonable and hard-working man (and labour was to be his title to it), not to the whims or the greed of the man who is quarrelsome and contentious. someone who had land left for his improvement land as good as what had already been taken up had no need to complain and ought not to concern himself with what had already been improved by someone else's labour. if he did, it would be obvious that he wanted the benefit of someone else's work, to which he had no right, rather than the ground that god had given him in common with others to labour on.

it is true, in land that is common in england, or any other country, where there is plenty of people under government, who have money and commerce, no one can inclose or appropriate any part, without the consent of all his fellow-commoners; because this is left common by compact, i.e. by the law of the land, which is not to be violated. and though it be common, in respect of some men, it is not so to all mankind; but is the joint property of this country, or this parish. besides, the remainder, after such enclosure, would not be as good to the rest of the commoners, as the whole was when they could all make use of the whole; whereas in the beginning and first peopling of the great common of the world, it was quite otherwise. the law man was under, was rather for appropriating. god commanded, and his wants forced him to labour. that was his property which could not be taken from him where-ever he had fixed it. and hence subduing or cultivating the earth, and having dominion, we see are joined together. the one gave title to the other. so that god, by commanding to subdue, gave authority so far to appropriate: and the condition of human life, which requires labour and materials to work on, necessarily introduces private possessions.
in countries such as england now, where there are many people living under a government, and where there is money and commerce, no-one can enclose or appropriate any part of any common land without the consent of all his fellow-commoners. that is because land that is held in common has that status by compact, i.e. by the law of the land, which is not to be violated. also, although such land is held in common by some men, it isn't held by all mankind; rather, it is the joint property of this county or this village. furthermore, after such an enclosure such a fencing off what was left would not, from the point of view of the rest of the commoners, be as good as the whole was when they could all make use of the whole. this is quite unlike how things stood when that great common, the world, was just starting and being populated. the law that man was under at that time was in favour of appropriating. god ordered man to work, and his wants forced him to do so. that was his property, which couldn't be taken from him wherever he had fixed it. and so we see that subduing or cultivating the earth and having dominion are joined together, the former creating the right to the latter.

the measure of property nature has well set by the extent of men's labour and the conveniencies of life: no man's labour could subdue, or appropriate all; nor could his enjoyment consume more than a small part; so that it was impossible for any man, this way, to intrench upon the right of another, or acquire to himself a property, to the prejudice of his neighbour, who would still have room for as good, and as large a possession (after the other had taken out his) as before it was appropriated. this measure did confine every man's possession to a very moderate proportion, and such as he might appropriate to himself, without injury to any body, in the first ages of the world, when men were more in danger to be lost, by wandering from their company, in the then vast wilderness of the earth, than to be straitened for want of room to plant in. and the same measure may be allowed still without prejudice to any body, as full as the world seems: for supposing a man, or family, in the state they were at first peopling of the world by the children of adam, or noah; let him plant in some inland, vacant places of america, we shall find that the possessions he could make himself, upon the measures we have given, would not be very large, nor, even to this day, prejudice the rest of mankind, or give them reason to complain, or think themselves injured by this man's incroachment, though the race of men have now spread themselves to all the corners of the world, and do infinitely exceed the small number was at the beginning. nay, the extent of ground is of so little value, without labour, that i have heard it affirmed, that in spain itself a man may be permitted to plough, sow and reap, without being disturbed, upon land he has no other title to, but only his making use of it. but, on the contrary, the inhabitants think themselves beholden to him, who, by his industry on neglected, and consequently waste land, has increased the stock of corn, which they wanted. but be this as it will, which i lay no stress on; this i dare boldly affirm, that the same rule of propriety, (viz.) that every man should have as much as he could make use of, would hold still in the world, without straitening any body; since there is land enough in the world to suffice double the inhabitants, had not the invention of money, and the tacit agreement of men to put a value on it, introduced (by consent) larger possessions, and a right to them; which, how it has done, i shall by and by shew more at large.
nature did well in setting limits to private property through limits to how much men can work and limits to how much they need. no man's labour could tame or appropriate all the land; no man's enjoyment could consume more than a small part; so that it was impossible for any man in this way to infringe on the right of another, or acquire a property to the disadvantage of his neighbour. this measure confined every man's possessions to a very moderate proportion, such as he might make his own without harming anyone else, in the first ages of the world when men were more in danger of getting lost by wandering off on their own in the vast wilderness of the earth as it was then than of being squeezed for lack of land to cultivate. and, full as the world now seems, the rule for land-ownership can still be adopted without harm to anyone. suppose a family in the state people were in when the world was first being populated by the children of adam, or of noah: let them plant on some vacant land in the interior of america. we'll find that the possessions they could acquire, by the rule i have given, would not be very large, and even today they wouldn't adversely affect the rest of mankind, or give them reason to complain or think themselves harmed by this family's encroachment. i maintain this despite the fact that the human race has spread itself to all the corners of the world, and infinitely outnumbers those who were here at the beginning. indeed, the extent of ground is of so little value when not worked on that i have been told that in spain a man may be permitted to plough, sow and reap on land to which his only title is that he is making use of it. be this as it may (and i don't insist on it), i venture to assert boldly that if it weren't for just one thing the same rule of ownership namely that every man is to own as much as he could make use of would still hold in the world, without inconveniencing anybody, because there is land enough in the world to suffice twice as many people as there are. the one thing that blocks this is the invention of money, and men's tacit agreement to put a value on it; this made it possible, with men's consent, to have larger possessions and to have a right to them. i now proceed to show how this has come about.

this is certain, that in the beginning, before the desire of having more than man needed had altered the intrinsic value of things, which depends only on their usefulness to the life of man; or had agreed, that a little piece of yellow metal, which would keep without wasting or decay, should be worth a great piece of flesh, or a whole heap of corn; though men had a right to appropriate, by their labour, each one of himself, as much of the things of nature, as he could use: yet this could not be much, nor to the prejudice of others, where the same plenty was still left to those who would use the same industry. to which let me add, that he who appropriates land to himself by his labour, does not lessen, but increase the common stock of mankind: for the provisions serving to the support of human life, produced by one acre of inclosed and cultivated land, are (to speak much within compass) ten times more than those which are yielded by an acre of land of an equal richness lying waste in common. and therefore he that incloses land, and has a greater plenty of the conveniencies of life from ten acres, than he could have from an hundred left to nature, may truly be said to give ninety acres to mankind: for his labour now supplies him with provisions out of ten acres, which were but the product of an hundred lying in common. i have here rated the improved land very low, in making its product but as ten to one, when it is much nearer an hundred to one: for i ask, whether in the wild woods and uncultivated waste of america, left to nature, without any improvement, tillage or husbandry, a thousand acres yield the needy and wretched inhabitants as many conveniencies of life, as ten acres of equally fertile land do in devonshire, where they are well cultivated?
men came to want more than they needed, and this altered the intrinsic value of things: a thing's value originally depended only on its usefulness to the life of man; but men came to agree that a little piece of yellow metal which wouldn't fade or rot or rust should be worth a great lump of flesh or a whole heap of corn. before all that happened, each man could appropriate by his labour as much of the things of nature as he could use, without detriment to others, because an equal abundance was still left to those who would work as hard on it. locke now moves away from the just-announced topic of money, and won't return to it until section 46. to which let me add that someone who comes to own land through his labour doesn't lessen the common stock of mankind but increases it. that's because the life-support provisions produced by one acre of enclosed and cultivated land, are (to put it very mildly) ten times more than what would come from an acre of equally rich land that was held in common and not cultivated. so he who encloses land, and gets more of the conveniences of life from ten cultivated acres than he could have had from a hundred left to nature, can truly be said to give ninety acres to mankind. for his labour now supplies him with provisions out of ten acres that would have needed a hundred uncultivated acres lying in common. i have here greatly understated the productivity of improved land, setting it at ten to one when really it is much nearer a hundred to one.

before the appropriation of land, he who gathered as much of the wild fruit, killed, caught, or tamed, as many of the beasts, as he could; he that so imployed his pains about any of the spontaneous products of nature, as any way to alter them from the state which nature put them in, by placing any of his labour on them, did thereby acquire a propriety in them: but if they perished, in his possession, without their due use; if the fruits rotted, or the venison putrified, before he could spend it, he offended against the common law of nature, and was liable to be punished; he invaded his neighbour's share, for he had no right, farther than his use called for any of them, and they might serve to afford him conveniencies of life.
if they perished in his possession without having been properly used if the fruits rotted or the venison putrefied before he could use it he offended against the common law of nature, and was liable to be punished. for he had encroached on his neighbour's share, because he had no right to these things beyond what use they could be to him to afford him conveniences of life.

the same measures governed the possession of land too: whatsoever he tilled and reaped, laid up and made use of, before it spoiled, that was his peculiar right; whatsoever he enclosed, and could feed, and make use of, the cattle and product was also his. but if either the grass of his enclosure rotted on the ground, or the fruit of his planting perished without gathering, and laying up, this part of the earth, notwithstanding his enclosure, was still to be looked on as waste, and might be the possession of any other. thus, at the beginning, cain might take as much ground as he could till, and make it his own land, and yet leave enough to abel's sheep to feed on; a few acres would serve for both their possessions. but as families increased, and industry inlarged their stocks, their possessions inlarged with the need of them; but yet it was commonly without any fixed property in the ground they made use of, till they incorporated, settled themselves together, and built cities; and then, by consent, they came in time, to set out the bounds of their distinct territories, and agree on limits between them and their neighbours; and by laws within themselves, settled the properties of those of the same society: for we see, that in that part of the world which was first inhabited, and therefore like to be best peopled, even as low down as abraham's time, they wandered with their flocks, and their herds, which was their substance, freely up and down; and this abraham did, in a country where he was a stranger. whence it is plain, that at least a great part of the land lay in common; that the inhabitants valued it not, nor claimed property in any more than they made use of. but when there was not room enough in the same place, for their herds to feed together, they by consent, as abraham and lot did, gen. xiii. 5. separated and inlarged their pasture, where it best liked them. and for the same reason esau went from his father, and his brother, and planted in mount seir, gen. xxxvi. 6.
the same rule governed the possession of land too: he had his own particular right to whatever grass etc. that he sowed, reaped, stored, and made use of before it spoiled; and to whatever animals he enclosed, fed, and made use of. but if the grass of his enclosure rotted on the ground, or the fruit of his planting perished without being harvested and stored, this part of the earth was still to be looked on as waste-land that might be owned by anyone else despite the fact that he had enclosed it. thus, at the beginning, cain might take as much ground as he could cultivate and make it his own land, still leaving enough for abel's sheep to feed on; a few acres would serve for both. but as families increased and by hard work enlarged their stocks, their possessions enlarged correspondingly; but this commonly happened without any fixed ownership of the land they made use of. in due course they formed into groups, settled themselves together, and built cities; and then eventually they set out the bounds of their distinct territories, agreed on boundaries between them and their neighbours, and established laws of their own to settle property-rights within the society. these land-ownership developments came relatively late. for we see that in the part of the world that was first inhabited and was therefore probably the most densely populated, even as late as abraham's time they wandered freely up and down with the flocks and herds that they lived on; and abraham did this even in a country where he was a foreigner. this shows clearly that a great part of the land, at least, lay in common; that the inhabitants didn't value it or claim ownership of it beyond making use of it. but when there came to be insufficient grazing land in the same place, they separated and enlarged their pasture where it best suited them.

and thus, without supposing any private dominion, and property in adam, over all the world, exclusive of all other men, which can no way be proved, nor any one's property be made out from it; but supposing the world given, as it was, to the children of men in common, we see how labour could make men distinct titles to several parcels of it, for their private uses; wherein there could be no doubt of right, no room for quarrel.
the supposition that adam had all to himself authority over and ownership of all the world, to the exclusion of all other men, can't be proved, and anyway couldn't be the basis for anyone's property-rights today. and we don't need it. supposing the world to have been given (as it was) to the children of men in common, we see how men's labour could give them separate titles to different parts of it, for their private uses; with no doubts about who has what rights, and no room for quarrelling.

nor is it so strange, as perhaps before consideration it may appear, that the property of labour should be able to over-balance the community of land: for it is labour indeed that puts the difference of value on every thing; and let any one consider what the difference is between an acre of land planted with tobacco or sugar, sown with wheat or barley, and an acre of the same land lying in common, without any husbandry upon it, and he will find, that the improvement of labour makes the far greater part of the value. i think it will be but a very modest computation to say, that of the products of the earth useful to the life of man nine tenths are the effects of labour: nay, if we will rightly estimate things as they come to our use, and cast up the several expences about them, what in them is purely owing to nature, and what to labour, we shall find, that in most of them ninety-nine hundredths are wholly to be put on the account of labour.
it isn't as strange as it may seem at first glance that the property of labour should be able to outweigh the community of land. for labour affects the value of everything. think of how an acre of land planted with tobacco or sugar, sown with wheat or barley, differs from an acre of the same land lying in common without being cultivated; you will see the improvement brought about by labour creates most of the extra value of the former. it would be a very conservative estimate to say that of the products of the earth that are useful to the life of man nine tenths are the effects of labour. indeed, if we rightly estimate the various expenses that have been involved in things as they come to our use, sorting out what in them is purely due to nature and what to labour, we'll find that in most of them ninety-nine hundredths of their value should go in the labour column.

there cannot be a clearer demonstration of any thing, than several nations of the americans are of this, who are rich in land, and poor in all the comforts of life; whom nature having furnished as liberally as any other people, with the materials of plenty, i.e. a fruitful soil, apt to produce in abundance, what might serve for food, raiment, and delight; yet for want of improving it by labour, have not one hundredth part of the conveniencies we enjoy: and a king of a large and fruitful territory there, feeds, lodges, and is clad worse than a day-labourer in england. to make this a little clearer, let us but trace some of the ordinary provisions of life, through their several progresses, before they come to our use, and see how much they receive of their value from human industry. bread, wine and cloth, are things of daily use, and great plenty; yet notwithstanding, acorns, water and leaves, or skins, must be our bread, drink and cloathing, did not labour furnish us with these more useful commodities: for whatever bread is more worth than acorns, wine than water, and cloth or silk, than leaves, skins or moss, that is wholly owing to labour and industry; the one of these being the food and raiment which unassisted nature furnishes us with; the other, provisions which our industry and pains prepare for us, which how much they exceed the other in value, when any one hath computed, he will then see how much labour makes the far greatest part of the value of things we enjoy in this world: and the ground which produces the materials, is scarce to be reckoned in, as any, or at most, but a very small part of it; so little, that even amongst us, land that is left wholly to nature, that hath no improvement of pasturage, tillage, or planting, is called, as indeed it is, waste; and we shall find the benefit of it amount to little more than nothing.
this will become clearer if we simply track some of the ordinary provisions of life through their various stages up to becoming useful to us, and see how much of their value comes from human industry. bread, wine and cloth are things we use daily, and we have plenty of them; but if it weren't for the labour that is put into these more useful commodities we would have to settle for acorns, water and leaves or skins as our food, drink and clothing. what makes bread more valuable than acorns, wine more valuable than water, and cloth or silk more valuable than leaves, skins or moss, is wholly due to labour and industry. one upshot of this is that the ground that produces the materials provides only a very small part of the final value. so small a part that even here in england land that is left wholly to nature, with no improvement through cultivation is rightly called waste, and we shall find that the benefit of it amounts to little more than nothing.

this shews how much numbers of men are to be preferred to largeness of dominions; and that the increase of lands, and the right employing of them, is the great art of government: and that prince, who shall be so wise and godlike, as by established laws of liberty to secure protection and encouragement to the honest industry of mankind, against the oppression of power and narrowness of party, will quickly be too hard for his neighbours: but this by the by. to return to the argument in hand.
this shows how much better it is to have a large population than to have a large country; and shows that the great art of government is to have the land used well, and that any ruler will quickly be safe against his neighbours if he has the wisdom the godlike wisdom to establish laws of liberty to protect and encourage the honest industry of his people against the oppression of power and narrowness of party. but that is by the way; i return now to the argument in hand.

an acre of land, that bears here twenty bushels of wheat, and another in america, which, with the same husbandry, would do the like, are, without doubt, of the same natural intrinsic value: but yet the benefit mankind receives from the one in a year, is worth 5l. and from the other possibly not worth a penny, if all the profit an indian received from it were to be valued, and sold here; at least, i may truly say, not one thousandth. it is labour then which puts the greatest part of value upon land, without which it would scarcely be worth any thing: it is to that we owe the greatest part of all its useful products; for all that the straw, bran, bread, of that acre of wheat, is more worth than the product of an acre of as good land, which lies waste, is all the effect of labour: for it is not barely the plough-man's pains, the reaper's and thresher's toil, and the baker's sweat, is to be counted into the bread we eat; the labour of those who broke the oxen, who digged and wrought the iron and stones, who felled and framed the timber employed about the plough, mill, oven, or any other utensils, which are a vast number, requisite to this corn, from its being feed to be sown to its being made bread, must all be charged on the account of labour, and received as an effect of that: nature and the earth furnished only the almost worthless materials, as in themselves. it would be a strange catalogue of things, that industry provided and made use of, about every loaf of bread, before it came to our use, if we could trace them; iron, wood, leather, bark, timber, stone, bricks, coals, lime, cloth, dying drugs, pitch, tar, masts, ropes, and all the materials made use of in the ship, that brought any of the commodities made use of by any of the workmen, to any part of the work; all which it would be almost impossible, at least too long, to reckon up.
it is labour, then, that puts the greatest part of value upon land, without which it would scarcely be worth anything. we owe to labour the greatest part of all the land's useful products; it is labour that makes the straw, bran, and bread of an acre of wheat more valuable than the product of an acre of equally good land that lies waste. the labour that goes into the bread we eat is not just the ploughman's efforts, the work of the reaper and the thresher, and the baker's sweat, but also the labour of those who domesticated the oxen, who dug and shaped the iron and stones, who felled and framed the timber used in the plough, the mill, the oven, or any of the vast number of other utensils that are needed to get this corn from sowable seed to edible bread. all this should be attributed to labour; as for nature and the land they provided only the materials, which were almost worthless in their raw condition. imagine what it would be like if every loaf of bread came to us along with a catalogue of all the contributions that labour had made to its existence! it would have to include the labour components in relevant pieces of iron, wood, leather, bark, timber, stone, bricks, coals, lime, cloth, dyes, pitch, tar, masts, ropes, and all the materials used in the ship that brought any of the commodities used by any of the workmen in any part of the work.

from all which it is evident, that though the things of nature are given in common, yet man, by being master of himself, and proprietor of his own person, and the actions or labour of it, had still in himself the great foundation of property; and that, which made up the great part of what he applied to the support or comfort of his being, when invention and arts had improved the conveniencies of life, was perfectly his own, and did not belong in common to others.
all this makes it clear that though the things of nature are given in common, man had in himself the great foundation for ownership namely his being master of himself, and owner of his own person and of the actions or work done by it; and that most of what he applied to the support or comfort of his being, when invention and skills had made life more comfortable, was entirely his own and didn't belong in common to others.

thus labour, in the beginning, gave a right of property, wherever any one was pleased to employ it upon what was common, which remained a long while the far greater part, and is yet more than mankind makes use of. men, at first, for the most part, contented themselves with what unassisted nature offered to their necessities: and though afterwards, in some parts of the world, (where the increase of people and stock, with the use of money, had made land scarce, and so of some value) the several communities settled the bounds of their distinct territories, and by laws within themselves regulated the properties of the private men of their society, and so, by compact and agreement, settled the property which labour and industry began; and the leagues that have been made between several states and kingdoms, either expresly or tacitly disowning all claim and right to the land in the others possession, have, by common consent, given up their pretences to their natural common right, which originally they had to those countries, and so have, by positive agreement, settled a property amongst themselves, in distinct parts and parcels of the earth; yet there are still great tracts of ground to be found, which (the inhabitants thereof not having joined with the rest of mankind, in the consent of the use of their common money) lie waste, and are more than the people who dwell on it do, or can make use of, and so still lie in common; tho this can scarce happen amongst that part of mankind that have consented to the use of money.
thus labour in the beginning gave a right of ownership wherever anyone chose to employ his labour on what was held in common. for a long time the common holdings were much greater than what was individually owned, and even now they are greater than what mankind makes use of. at first, men were mainly contented with what unassisted nature offered to meet their needs, but then: in some parts of the world (where the increase of people and animals, and the use of money, had made land scarce and thus of some value) various communities settled the bounds of their separate territories, and by laws within themselves regulated the properties of the private men in their society, and in this way by compact and agreement they settled the property rights that labour and industry had begun. and the leagues that have been made between different states and kingdoms, either explicitly or tacitly disowning all claim to one anothers land, have by common consent given up their claims to their natural common right in undeveloped land in one anothers domains, and so have by positive agreement settled who owns what in various parts and parcels of the earth, so that, for instance, no englishman can claim to own an acre of france because (i) it was uncultivated until he worked on it and (ii) he was not a party to internal french laws giving its ownership to someone else. even after all this, however, there are great tracts of ground that still lie in common and so could legitimately be claimed on the basis of labour. these are in territories whose inhabitants haven't joined with the rest of mankind in the consent of the use of their common money, and are lands that exceed what the inhabitants do or can make use of. though this can hardly happen among people who have agreed to use money.

the greatest part of things really useful to the life of man, and such as the necessity of subsisting made the first commoners of the world look after, as it doth the americans now, are generally things of short duration; such as, if they are not consumed by use, will decay and perish of themselves: gold, silver and diamonds, are things that fancy or agreement hath put the value on, more than real use, and the necessary support of life. now of those good things which nature hath provided in common, every one had a right (as hath been said) to as much as he could use, and property in all that he could effect with his labour; all that his industry could extend to, to alter from the state nature had put it in, was his. he that gathered a hundred bushels of acorns or apples, had thereby a property in them, they were his goods as soon as gathered. he was only to look, that he used them before they spoiled, else he took more than his share, and robbed others. and indeed it was a foolish thing, as well as dishonest, to hoard up more than he could make use of. if he gave away a part to any body else, so that it perished not uselesly in his possession, these he also made use of. and if he also bartered away plums, that would have rotted in a week, for nuts that would last good for his eating a whole year, he did no injury; he wasted not the common stock; destroyed no part of the portion of goods that belonged to others, so long as nothing perished uselesly in his hands. again, if he would give his nuts for a piece of metal, pleased with its colour; or exchange his sheep for shells, or wool for a sparkling pebble or a diamond, and keep those by him all his life he invaded not the right of others, he might heap up as much of these durable things as he pleased; the exceeding of the bounds of his just property not lying in the largeness of his possession, but the perishing of any thing uselesly in it.
most of the things useful to the life of man things that the world's first commoners, like the americans even now, were forced to seek for their sheer survival are things of short duration, things that will decay and perish if they are not consumed soon. the much more durable gold, silver and diamonds are things that have value by agreement rather than because there is a real use for them in sustaining life. i shall now explain how those two kinds of value came to be linked. of the good things that nature has provided in common, everyone had a right (as i have said) to as much as he could use. each man owned everything that he could bring about with his labour, everything that his industry could alter from the state nature had put it in. he who gathered a hundred bushels of acorns or apples thereby owned them; as soon as he had gathered them, they were his. his only obligation was to be sure that he used them before they spoiled, for otherwise he took more than his share, and robbed others. and indeed it was foolish as well as dishonest to hoard up more than he could use . now consider a graded trio of cases. (i) if he gave away some to someone else, so that it didn't perish uselessly in his possession, that was one way of using it. (ii) and if he traded plums that would have rotted in a week for nuts that would remain eatable for a year, he wasn't harming anyone. as long as nothing perished uselessly in his hands, he wasn't wasting the common stock, destroying goods that belonged to others. (iii) if he traded his store of nuts for a piece of metal that had a pleasing colour, or exchanged his sheep for shells, or his wool for a sparkling pebble or a diamond, and kept those the metal, shells, pebbles, diamonds in his possession all his life, this wasn't encroaching on anyone else's rights. what would take him beyond the bounds of his rightful property was not having a great deal but letting something spoil instead of being used.

and thus came in the use of money, some lasting thing that men might keep without spoiling, and that by mutual consent men would take in exchange for the truly useful, but perishable supports of life.
that is how money came into use as a durable thing that men could keep without its spoiling, and that by mutual consent men would take in exchange for the truly useful but perishable supports of life.

and as different degrees of industry were apt to give men possessions in different proportions, so this invention of money gave them the opportunity to continue and enlarge them: for supposing an island, separate from all possible commerce with the rest of the world, wherein there were but an hundred families, but there were sheep, horses and cows, with other useful animals, wholsome fruits, and land enough for corn for a hundred thousand times as many, but nothing in the island, either because of its commonness, or perishableness, fit to supply the place of money; what reason could any one have there to enlarge his possessions beyond the use of his family, and a plentiful supply to its consumption, either in what their own industry produced, or they could barter for like perishable, useful commodities, with others? where there is not some thing, both lasting and scarce, and so valuable to be hoarded up, there men will not be apt to enlarge their possessions of land, were it never so rich, never so free for them to take: for i ask, what would a man value ten thousand, or an hundred thousand acres of excellent land, ready cultivated, and well stocked too with cattle, in the middle of the inland parts of america, where he had no hopes of commerce with other parts of the world, to draw money to him by the sale of the product? it would not be worth the enclosing, and we should see him give up again to the wild common of nature, whatever was more than would supply the conveniencies of life to be had there for him and his family.
and as differences in how hard men worked were apt to make differences in how much they owned, so this invention of money gave them the opportunity to continue and enlarge their possessions. consider this possibility: an island separated from any possibility of trade with the rest of the world; only a hundred families on the island; but enough sheep, horses and cows and other useful animals, enough wholesome fruits, and enough land for corn, for a hundred thousand times as many; but nothing on the island that is rare and durable enough to serve as money. on such an island, what reason could anyone have to enlarge his possessions beyond the needs of his household, these being met by his own industry and/or trade with other households for similarly perishable and useful commodities? men won't be apt to enlarge their possessions of land however rich and available extra land may be if there isn't something durable and scarce and counted as valuable to store up. suppose someone has the opportunity to come to own ten thousand (or a hundred thousand) acres of excellent land, already cultivated and well stocked with cattle, in the middle of the interior of america where he has no hopes of commerce with other parts of the world through which to get money through the sale of the product. what value will he attach to this estate? it wouldn't be worth his while to mark its boundaries; he will hand it back to the wild common of nature, apart from what it would supply for the conveniences of life to be had there for him and his family.

thus in the beginning all the world was america, and more so than that is now; for no such thing as money was any where known. find out something that hath the use and value of money amongst his neighbours, you shall see the same man will begin presently to enlarge his possessions.
thus in the beginning all the world was america even more so than america is now, because in the beginning no such thing as money was known anywhere. find out something that has the use and value of money among a man's neighbours and you'll see him start to enlarge his possessions.

but since gold and silver, being little useful to the life of man in proportion to food, raiment, and carriage, has its value only from the consent of men, whereof labour yet makes, in great part, the measure, it is plain, that men have agreed to a disproportionate and unequal possession of the earth, they having, by a tacit and voluntary consent, found out, a way how a man may fairly possess more land than he himself can use the product of, by receiving in exchange for the overplus gold and silver, which may be hoarded up without injury to any one; these metals not spoiling or decaying in the hands of the possessor. this partage of things in an inequality of private possessions, men have made practicable out of the bounds of society, and without compact, only by putting a value on gold and silver, and tacitly agreeing in the use of money: for in governments, the laws regulate the right of property, and the possession of land is determined by positive constitutions.
in this section locke goes over it again: by tacitly agreeing to attach value to gold, silver or other money, men have found a way for someone to own more than he can use. he concludes with the remark that in governments, the laws regulate the right of property, and the possession of land is determined by positive constitutions (see note on positive at the end of section 1).

and thus, i think, it is very easy to conceive, without any difficulty, how labour could at first begin a title of property in the common things of nature, and how the spending it upon our uses bounded it. so that there could then be no reason of quarrelling about title, nor any doubt about the largeness of possession it gave. right and conveniency went together; for as a man had a right to all he could employ his labour upon, so he had no temptation to labour for more than he could make use of. this left no room for controversy about the title, nor for encroachment on the right of others; what portion a man carved to himself, was easily seen; and it was useless, as well as dishonest, to carve himself too much, or take more than he needed.
it is easy to conceive, then, how labour could at first create ownership of some of the common things of nature, and how uses we could make of those things set limits to what could be owned by any individual. so there couldn't be any reason for quarrelling about title, or any doubt about how much could be owned. right and convenience went together; for as a man had a right to all he could employ his labour upon, so he had no temptation to labour for more than he could use. this left no room for controversy about the title, or for encroachment on the rights of others: what portion a man carved out for himself was easily seen; and it was useless as well as dishonest for him to carve out too much or take more than he needed.

of paternal power.
paternal power

it may perhaps be censured as an impertinent criticism, in a discourse of this nature, to find fault with words and names, that have obtained in the world: and yet possibly it may not be amiss to offer new ones, when the old are apt to lead men into mistakes, as this of paternal power probably has done, which seems so to place the power of parents over their children wholly in the father, as if the mother had no share in it; whereas, if we consult reason or revelation, we shall find, she hath an equal title. this may give one reason to ask, whether this might not be more properly called parental power? for whatever obligation nature and the right of generation lays on children, it must certainly bind them equal to both the concurrent causes of it. and accordingly we see the positive law of god every where joins them together, without distinction, when it commands the obedience of children, honour thy father and thy mother, exod. xx. 12. whosoever curseth his father or his mother, lev. xx. 9. ye shall fear every man his mother and his father, lev. xix. 3. children, obey your parents, &c. eph. vi. 1. is the stile of the old and new testament.
you may think that a work like the present one is not the place for complaints about words and names that have become current; but i think it won't be amiss to offer new words when the old ones are apt to lead men into mistakes. the phrase paternal power is probably an example of this. it seems so to place the power of parents over their children wholly in the father, as though the mother had no share in it; whereas reason and revelation both tell us that she has an equal title. might it not be better to call it parental power? whatever obligations are laid on children by nature and the right of generation must certainly bind them equally to each of the joint causes of their being generated. and accordingly we see the positive law of god everywhere joins the parents together, without distinction, when it commands the obedience of children.

had but this one thing been well considered, without looking any deeper into the matter, it might perhaps have kept men from running into those gross mistakes, they have made, about this power of parents; which, however it might, without any great harshness, bear the name of absolute dominion, and regal authority, when under the title of paternal power it seemed appropriated to the father, would yet have founded but oddly, and in the very name shewn the absurdity, if this supposed absolute power over children had been called parental; and thereby have discovered, that it belonged to the mother too: for it will but very ill serve the turn of those men, who contend so much for the absolute power and authority of the fatherhood, as they call it, that the mother should have any share in it; and it would have but ill supported the monarchy they contend for, when by the very name it appeared, that that fundamental authority, from whence they would derive their government of a single person only, was not placed in one, but two persons jointly. but to let this of names pass.
had just this one thing been thought about properly, even without going any deeper, it might have kept men from running into the gross mistakes they have made about this power of parents. when under the label paternal power it seemed to belong only to the father, it could be described as absolute dominion and as regal authority without seeming ridiculous; but those phrases would have sounded strange, and in the very name shown the absurdity of the doctrine in question, if this supposed absolute power over children had been called parental, for that would have given away the fact that it belonged to the mother too. those who contend so much for the absolute power and authority of fatherhood, as they call it, will be in difficulties if the mother is given any share in it. the monarchy they contend for wouldn't be well supported if the very name showed that the fundamental authority from which they want to derive their government by only a single person belonged not to one person but to two! but no more about names.

though i have said above, chap. ii. that all men by nature are equal, i cannot be supposed to understand all sorts of equality: age or virtue may give men a just precedency: excellency of parts and merit may place others above the common level: birth may subject some, and alliance or benefits others, to pay an observance to those to whom nature, gratitude, or other respects, may have made it due: and yet all this consists with the equality, which all men are in, in respect of jurisdiction or dominion one over another; which was the equality i there spoke of, as proper to the business in hand, being that equal right, that every man hath, to his natural freedom, without being subjected to the will or authority of any other man.
i said in chapter 2 that all men are by nature equal, but of course i didn't mean equality in all respects. age or virtue may put some men above others; excellence of ability and merit may raise others above the common level; some may naturally owe deference to others because of their birth, or from gratitude because of benefits they have received, or for other reasons. but all this is consistent with the equality that all men have in respect of jurisdiction or dominion over one another. that was the equality i spoke of in chapter 2 the equality that is relevant to the business in hand, namely the equal right that every man has to his natural freedom, without being subjected to the will or authority of any other man.

children, i confess, are not born in this full state of equality, though they are born to it. their parents have a sort of rule and jurisdiction over them, when they come into the world, and for some time after; but it is but a temporary one. the bonds of this subjection are like the swaddling clothes they are wrapt up in, and supported by, in the weakness of their infancy: age and reason as they grow up, loosen them, till at length they drop quite off, and leave a man at his own free disposal.
i acknowledge that children are not born in this state of full equality, though they are born to it. their parents have a sort of rule and jurisdiction over them when they come into the world and for some time after that, but it's only a temporary one. the bonds of this subjection are like the swaddling clothes they are wrapped up in and supported by in the weakness of their infancy; as the child grows up, age and reason loosen the ties, until at last they drop off altogether and leave a man to his own devices.

adam was created a perfect man, his body and mind in full possession of their strength and reason, and so was capable, from the first instant of his being to provide for his own support and preservation, and govern his actions according to the dictates of the law of reason which god had implanted in him. from him the world is peopled with his descendants, who are all born infants, weak and helpless, without knowledge or understanding: but to supply the defects of this imperfect state, till the improvement of growth and age hath removed them, adam and eve, and after them all parents were, by the law of nature, under an obligation to preserve, nourish, and educate the children they had begotten; not as their own workmanship, but the workmanship of their own maker, the almighty, to whom they were to be accountable for them.
adam was created as a complete man, his body and mind in full possession of their strength and reason; so he was able, from the first instant of his coming into existence, to provide for his own support and survival, and to govern his actions according to the dictates of the law of reason that god had implanted in him. the world has been populated with his descendants, who are all born infants, weak and helpless, without knowledge or understanding. to make up for the defects of this imperfect state until till the improvement of growth and age has removed them, adam and eve and all parents after them were obliged by the law of nature to preserve, nourish, and bring up the children they had begotten not as their own workmanship, but as the workmanship of their own maker, the almighty god, to whom they were to be accountable for them.

the law, that was to govern adam, was the same that was to govern all his posterity, the law of reason. but his offspring having another way of entrance into the world, different from him, by a natural birth, that produced them ignorant and without the use of reason, they were not presently under that law; for no body can be under a law, which is not promulgated to him; and this law being promulgated or made known by reason only, he that is not come to the use of his reason, cannot be said to be under this law; and adam's children, being not presently as soon as born under this law of reason, were not presently free: for law, in its true notion, is not so much the limitation as the direction of a free and intelligent agent to his proper interest, and prescribes no farther than is for the general good of those under that law: could they be happier without it, the law, as an useless thing, would of itself vanish; and that ill deserves the name of confinement which hedges us in only from bogs and precipices. so that, however it may be mistaken, the end of law is not to abolish or restrain, but to preserve and enlarge freedom: for in all the states of created beings capable of laws, where there is no law, there is no freedom: for liberty is, to be free from restraint and violence from others; which cannot be, where there is no law: but freedom is not, as we are told, a liberty for every man to do what he lists: (for who could be free, when every other man's humour might domineer over him?) but a liberty to dispose, and order as he lists, his person, actions, possessions, and his whole property, within the allowance of those laws under which he is, and therein not to be subject to the arbitrary will of another, but freely follow his own.
the law that was to govern adam was the very one that was to govern all his posterity, namely the law of reason. but his offspring entered the world differently from him, namely by natural birth, which brought them out ignorant and without the use of reason. so they were not immediately under the law of reason, because nobody can be under a law that hasn't been made known to him; and this law is made known only by reason, so that someone who hasn't come to the use of his reason can't be said to be under it. adam's children, not being under this law at birth, were not free at that time; for law, properly understood, is not so much the limitation as the direction of a free and intelligent agent to his proper interest, and doesn't prescribe anything that isn't for the general good of those under that law. if men could be happier without it, the law would be a useless thing and would inevitably vanish. don't think of the law as confining: it is wrong to label as confinement something that hedges us in only from bogs and precipices! so, however much people may get this wrong, what law is for is not to abolish or restrain freedom but to preserve and enlarge it; for in all the states of created beings who are capable of laws, where there is no law there is no freedom. liberty is freedom from restraint and violence by others; and this can't be had where there is no law. this freedom is not as some say it is a freedom for every man to do whatever he wants to do (for who could be free if every other man's whims might dominate him?); rather, it is a freedom to dispose in any way he wants of his person, his actions, his possessions, and his whole property not to be subject in any of this to the arbitrary will of anyone else but freely to follow his own will, all within whatever limits are set by the laws that he is under.

the power, then, that parents have over their children, arises from that duty which is incumbent on them, to take care of their off-spring, during the imperfect state of childhood. to inform the mind, and govern the actions of their yet ignorant nonage, till reason shall take its place, and ease them of that trouble, is what the children want, and the parents are bound to: for god having given man an understanding to direct his actions, has allowed him a freedom of will, and liberty of acting, as properly belonging thereunto, within the bounds of that law he is under. but whilst he is in an estate, wherein he has not understanding of his own to direct his will, he is not to have any will of his own to follow: he that understands for him, must will for him too; he must prescribe to his will, and regulate his actions; but when he comes to the estate that made his father a freeman, the son is a freeman too.
so the power that parents have over their children arises from their duty to take care of their offspring during the imperfect state of childhood. what the children need, and what the parents are obliged to provide, is the forming of their minds and the governing of their actions; that is while the children are still young and ignorant; when reason comes into play the parents are released from that trouble. god gave man an understanding to direct his actions, and (fitting in with that) allowed him a freedom of will and of acting within the limits set by the law he is under. but while he is in a condition in which he hasn't enough understanding of his own to direct his will, he isn't to have any will of his own to follow. the person who understands for him must will for him too; that person must prescribe to his will and regulate his actions; but when he reaches the condition that made his father a freeman, the son is a freeman too.

this holds in all the laws a man is under, whether natural or civil. is a man under the law of nature? what made him free of that law? what gave him a free disposing of his property, according to his own will, within the compass of that law? i answer, a state of maturity wherein he might be supposed capable to know that law, that so he might keep his actions within the bounds of it. when he has acquired that state, he is presumed to know how far that law is to be his guide, and how far he may make use of his freedom, and so comes to have it; till then, some body else must guide him, who is presumed to know how far the law allows a liberty. if such a state of reason, such an age of discretion made him free, the same shall make his son free too. is a man under the law of england? what made him free of that law? that is, to have the liberty to dispose of his actions and possessions according to his own will, within the permission of that law? a capacity of knowing that law; which is supposed by that law, at the age of one and twenty years, and in some cases sooner. if this made the father free, it shall make the son free too. till then we see the law allows the son to have no will, but he is to be guided by the will of his father or guardian, who is to understand for him. and if the father die, and fail to substitute a deputy in his trust; if he hath not provided a tutor, to govern his son, during his minority, during his want of understanding, the law takes care to do it; some other must govern him, and be a will to him, till he hath attained to a state of freedom, and his understanding be fit to take the government of his will. but after that, the father and son are equally free as much as tutor and pupil after nonage; equally subjects of the same law together, without any dominion left in the father over the life, liberty, or estate of his son, whether they be only in the state and under the law of nature, or under the positive laws of an established government.
this holds in all the laws a man is under, whether natural or civil. let us look at these separately. if a man is under the law of nature, what made him free under that law? what gave him freedom to dispose of his property according to his own will, within the limits set by that law? i answer, a state of maturity in which he might be supposed to be capable of knowing that law so that he could keep his actions within the limits set by it. when he has entered that state, he is presumed to know how far that law is to be his guide, and how far he may make use of his freedom; and so he comes to have that freedom. until then, he must be guided by somebody else who is presumed to know how far the law allows a liberty. if such a state of reason, such an age of discretion, made him free, the same state will make his son free too. if a man is under the law of england, what made him free under that law? that is, what gave him the liberty to dispose of his actions and possessions as he wishes, within the limits of what that law allows? i answer, a capacity for knowing that law a capacity which the law itself supposes to be present at the age of twenty-one and in some cases sooner. if this made the father free, it will make the son free too. till then we see the law allows the son to have no will: he is to be guided by the will of his father or guardian, who is to do his understanding for him. and if the father dies and fails to substitute a deputy in his place, or if he doesn't provide a tutor to govern his son while he is a minor who lacks understanding, the law takes care to do it. someone else must govern him and be a will to him until he has reached a state of freedom, and his understanding has become fit to take over the government of his will. but after that the father and son are equally free, as are a tutor and his pupil after the pupil has grown up. they are equally subjects of the same law together, and the father has no remaining dominion over the life, liberty, or estate of his son. this holds, whether they are only in the state of nature and under its law or are under the positive laws of an established government.

but if, through defects that may happen out of the ordinary course of nature, any one comes not to such a degree of reason, wherein he might be supposed capable of knowing the law, and so living within the rules of it, he is never capable of being a free man, he is never let loose to the disposure of his own will (because he knows no bounds to it, has not understanding, its proper guide) but is continued under the tuition and government of others, all the time his own understanding is uncapable of that charge. and so lunatics and ideots are never set free from the government of their parents;
but if, through defects that happen out of the ordinary course of nature, someone never achieves a degree of reason that would make him capable of knowing the law and so living within the rules of it, he is never capable of being a free man, he is never allowed freely to follow his own will (because he knows no bounds to it, doesn't have the understanding that is the will's proper guide), but continues under the tuition and government of others for as long as his own understanding is incapable of taking over. and so lunatics and idiots are never freed from the government of their parents.

thus we are born free, as we are born rational; not that we have actually the exercise of either: age, that brings one, brings with it the other too. and thus we see how natural freedom and subjection to parents may consist together, and are both founded on the same principle. a child is free by his father's title, by his father's understanding, which is to govern him till he hath it of his own. the freedom of a man at years of discretion, and the subjection of a child to his parents, whilst yet short of that age, are so consistent, and so distinguishable, that the most blinded contenders for monarchy, by right of fatherhood, cannot miss this difference; the most obstinate cannot but allow their consistency: for were their doctrine all true, were the right heir of adam now known, and by that title settled a monarch in his throne, invested with all the absolute unlimited power sir robert filmer talks of; if he should die as soon as his heir were born, must not the child, notwithstanding he were never so free, never so much sovereign, be in subjection to his mother and nurse, to tutors and governors, till age and education brought him reason and ability to govern himself and others? the necessities of his life, the health of his body, and the information of his mind, would require him to be directed by the will of others, and not his own; and yet will any one think, that this restraint and subjection were inconsistent with, or spoiled him of that liberty or sovereignty he had a right to, or gave away his empire to those who had the government of his nonage? this government over him only prepared him the better and sooner for it. if any body should ask me, when my son is of age to be free? i shall answer, just when his monarch is of age to govern. but at what time, says the judicious hooker, eccl. pol. l. i. sect. 6. a man may be said to have attained so far forth the use of reason, as sufficeth to make him capable of those laws whereby he is then bound to guide his actions: this is a great deal more easy for sense to discern, than for any one by skill and learning to determine.
thus we are born free, as we are born rational; not that we as newborn babies actually have the use of either: age that brings reason brings freedom with it. so we see how natural freedom is consistent with subjection to parents, both being based on the same principle. a child is free by his father's title, by his father's understanding, which is to govern him till he has understanding of his own. the freedom of a mature man and the subjection of a not yet mature child to his parents are so consistent with one another, and so distinguishable, that the most blinded contenders for monarchy-by-right-of-fatherhood can't miss this difference; the most obstinate of them can't maintain that the two are inconsistent. i now show their consistency with one another within the context of filmer's theory of monarchy. suppose their doctrine of monarchy were all true, and the right contemporary heir of adam were now known and by that title settled as a monarch on his throne, invested with all the absolute unlimited power that sir robert filmer talks of. if this monarch were to die just after his heir was born, wouldn't the child however free and sovereign he was be subject to his mother and nurse, to tutors and governors, till age and education brought him reason and the ability to govern himself and others? the necessities of his life, the health of his body, and the forming of his mind, would all require that he be directed by the will of others and not by his own will. but will anyone think that this restraint and subjection would be inconsistent with (or deprived him of) the liberty or sovereignty that he had a right to, or gave away his empire to those who had the government of him in his youth? this government over him would only prepare him the better and sooner for being a governor of others. if anybody should ask me when my son is of age to be free, i would answer: just when his monarch is of age to govern! as for determining when a man can be said to have achieved enough use of reason to be capable of understanding and obeying those laws whereby he is then bound: this, says the judicious hooker (ecclesiastical polity, book 1, section 6), is a great deal easier for sense to discern than for anyone by skill and learning to determine.

common-wealths themselves take notice of, and allow, that there is a time when men are to begin to act like free men, and therefore till that time require not oaths of fealty, or allegiance, or other public owning of, or submission to the government of their countries.
commonwealths themselves allow that there is an age at which men are to begin to act like free men, so that before that age they aren't required to take oaths of allegiance or in any other way to declare the authority of the government of their countries.

the freedom then of man, and liberty of acting according to his own will, is grounded on his having reason, which is able to instruct him in that law he is to govern himself by, and make him know how far he is left to the freedom of his own will. to turn him loose to an unrestrained liberty, before he has reason to guide him, is not the allowing him the privilege of his nature to be free; but to thrust him out amongst brutes, and abandon him to a state as wretched, and as much beneath that of a man, as their's. this is that which puts the authority into the parents hands to govern the minority of their children. god hath made it their business to employ this care on their offspring, and hath placed in them suitable inclinations of tenderness and concern to temper this power, to apply it, as his wisdom designed it, to the children's good, as long as they should need to be under it.
so a man's freedom his liberty of acting according to his own will is based on his having reason, which can instruct him in the law he is to govern himself by, and make him know to what extent he is left to the freedom of his own will. to turn him loose and give him complete liberty before he has reason to guide him is not allowing him his natural privilege of being free; rather, it is pushing him out among the lower animals and abandoning him to a state as wretched and sub-human as theirs is. this is what gives parents the authority to govern their children while they are minors. god has made it their business to take this care of their offspring, and has built into them tendencies to gentleness and concern so as to moderate this power, so that they will use the power, for as long as the children need to be under it, for the children's good.

but what reason can hence advance this care of the parents due to their off-spring into an absolute arbitrary dominion of the father, whose power reaches no farther, than by such a discipline, as he finds most effectual, to give such strength and health to their bodies, such vigour and rectitude to their minds, as may best fit his children to be most useful to themselves and others; and, if it be necessary to his condition, to make them work, when they are able, for their own subsistence. but in this power the mother too has her share with the father.
but what reason can there be to expand the care that parents owe to their offspring into an absolute arbitrary command of the father? in fact, a father's power reaches only far enough to impose the discipline that he finds effective in giving his children the strong and healthy bodies and vigorous and right-thinking minds that will best fit them to be most useful to themselves and others; and, if it is necessary in the family's circumstances, to make them work, when they are able, for their own livelihood. but in this power the mother too has her share with the father.

nay, this power so little belongs to the father by any peculiar right of nature, but only as he is guardian of his children, that when he quits his care of them, he loses his power over them, which goes along with their nourishment and education, to which it is inseparably annexed; and it belongs as much to the foster-father of an exposed child, as to the natural father of another. so little power does the bare act of begetting give a man over his issue; if all his care ends there, and this be all the title he hath to the name and authority of a father. and what will become of this paternal power in that part of the world, where one woman hath more than one husband at a time? or in those parts of america, where, when the husband and wife part, which happens frequently, the children are all left to the mother, follow her, and are wholly under her care and provision? if the father die whilst the children are young, do they not naturally every where owe the same obedience to their mother, during their minority, as to their father were he alive? and will any one say, that the mother hath a legislative power over her children? that she can make standing rules, which shall be of perpetual obligation, by which they ought to regulate all the concerns of their property, and bound their liberty all the course of their lives? or can she inforce the observation of them with capital punishments? for this is the proper power of the magistrate, of which the father hath not so much as the shadow. his command over his children is but temporary, and reaches not their life or property: it is but a help to the weakness and imperfection of their nonage, a discipline necessary to their education: and though a father may dispose of his own possessions as he pleases, when his children are out of danger of perishing for want, yet his power extends not to the lives or goods, which either their own industry, or another's bounty has made their's; nor to their liberty neither, when they are once arrived to the infranchisement of the years of discretion. the father's empire then ceases, and he can from thence forwards no more dispose of the liberty of his son, than that of any other man: and it must be far from an absolute or perpetual jurisdiction, from which a man may withdraw himself, having license from divine authority to leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife.
indeed, this power is so far from being something that the father has by a special right of nature, rather than having it in his role as the guardian of his children, that when his care of them comes to an end so does his power over them. that power is inseparably tied to their nourishment and upbringing; and it belongs as much to the foster-father of an abandoned baby as to the natural father of another child. that's how little power the bare act of begetting gives a man over his offspring: if all his care ends there, and his only claim on the name and authority of a father is that he begot the child, his power comes to nothing. and what will become of this paternal power in places where one woman has more than one husband at a time? or in the parts of america where when the husband and wife separate (which happens frequently) the children all stay with the mother and are wholly cared for and provided for by her? if a father dies while the children are young, don't they naturally everywhere owe the same obedience to their mother, during their minority, as they would to their father if he were still alive? obviously they do! and then, with paternal power replaced by maternal power, the idea that governmental power comes from this source becomes even more clearly incredible. for consider: will anyone say that the widowed mother has a legislative power over her children? that she can make laws that will oblige the children throughout their lives, regulating all matters having to do with property and freedom of action? and that she can enforce the observation of these laws with capital punishments? all of that lies within the legitimate scope of the law-giver, and the father doesn't have even the shadow of it!. his command over his children is only temporary, and doesn't affect their life or property.

but though there be a time when a child comes to be as free from subjection to the will and command of his father, as the father himself is free from subjection to the will of any body else, and they are each under no other restraint, but that which is common to them both, whether it be the law of nature, or municipal law of their country; yet this freedom exempts not a son from that honour which he ought, by the law of god and nature, to pay his parents. god having made the parents instruments in his great design of continuing the race of mankind, and the occasions of life to their children; as he hath laid on them an obligation to nourish, preserve, and bring up their offspring; so he has laid on the children a perpetual obligation of honouring their parents, which containing in it an inward esteem and reverence to be shewn by all outward expressions, ties up the child from any thing that may ever injure or affront, disturb or endanger, the happiness or life of those from whom he received his; and engages him in all actions of defence, relief, assistance and comfort of those, by whose means he entered into being, and has been made capable of any enjoyments of life: from this obligation no state, no freedom can absolve children. but this is very far from giving parents a power of command over their children, or an authority to make laws and dispose as they please of their lives or liberties. it is one thing to owe honour, respect, gratitude and assistance; another to require an absolute obedience and submission. the honour due to parents, a monarch in his throne owes his mother; and yet this lessens not his authority, nor subjects him to her government.
but though in due course a child comes to be as free from subjection to the will and command of his father as the father himself is free from subjection to the will of anyone else, and each of them is under only the restraints that also bind the other from the law of nature and from the civil law of their country this freedom that the son has doesn't exempt him from honouring his parents as he is required to do by the law of god and nature. god having made the parents through their having children serve as instruments in his great design of continuing the race of mankind, laid on them an obligation to nourish, preserve, and bring up their offspring, and also laid on children a perpetual obligation to honour their parents. this honour involves an inward esteem and reverence to be shown by all outward expressions, so it holds the child back from anything that might ever injure or offend, disturb or endanger, the happiness or life of those from whom he received his own life; and draws him into doing all he can for the defence, relief, assistance and comfort of those by whose means he came into existence and has been made capable of enjoying life. no state and no kind of freedom can free children from this obligation. but this is very far from giving parents a power of command over their children, or an authority to make laws and dispose as they please of the children's lives or liberties. it is one thing to be owed honour, respect, gratitude and assistance; another to require absolute obedience and submission. a monarch on his throne owes his mother the honour any son owes his parents, but this doesn't lessen his authority or entitle her to govern him.

this shews the reason how it comes to pass, that parents in societies, where they themselves are subjects, retain a power over their children, and have as much right to their subjection, as those who are in the state of nature. which could not possibly be, if all political power were only paternal, and that in truth they were one and the same thing: for then, all paternal power being in the prince, the subject could naturally have none of it. but these two powers, political and paternal, are so perfectly distinct and separate; are built upon so different foundations, and given to so different ends, that every subject that is a father, has as much a paternal power over his children, as the prince has over his: and every prince, that has parents, owes them as much filial duty and obedience, as the meanest of his subjects do to their's; and can therefore contain not any part or degree of that kind of dominion, which a prince or magistrate has over his subject. though the obligation on the parents to bring up their children, and the obligation on children to honour their parents, contain all the power on the one hand, and submission on the other, which are proper to this relation, yet there is another power ordinarily in the father, whereby he has a tie on the obedience of his children; which tho it be common to him with other men, yet the occasions of shewing it, almost constantly happening to fathers in their private families, and the instances of it elsewhere being rare, and less taken notice of, it passes in the world for a part of paternal jurisdiction. and this is the power men generally have to bestow their estates on those who please them best; the possession of the father being the expectation and inheritance of the children, ordinarily in certain proportions, according to the law and custom of each country; yet it is commonly in the father's power to bestow it with a more sparing or liberal hand, according as the behaviour of this or that child hath comported with his will and humour.
in addition to the powers of privileges discussed above, there is another power that a father ordinarily has, which gives him a hold on the obedience of his children. although men in general have this power, the occasions for using it are nearly always within the private lives of families; it seldom shows up anywhere else, and when it does it isn't much noticed, which is why it is generally taken to be a part of paternal jurisdiction. what i am talking about is the power men generally have to leave their estates to those who please them best. children can expect to inherit from their father, usually in certain proportions according to the law and custom of the country; but the father commonly has the power to make bequests with a more or less generous hand depending on how much each child has behaved in ways that he has agreed with and liked.

this is no small tie on the obedience of children: and there being always annexed to the enjoyment of land, a submission to the government of the country, of which that land is a part; it has been commonly supposed, that a father could oblige his posterity to that government, of which he himself was a subject, and that his compact held them; whereas, it being only a necessary condition annexed to the land, and the inheritance of an estate which is under that government, reaches only those who will take it on that condition, and so is no natural tie or engagement, but a voluntary submission: for every man's children being by nature as free as himself, or any of his ancestors ever were, may, whilst they are in that freedom, choose what society they will join themselves to, what commonwealth they will put themselves under. but if they will enjoy the inheritance of their ancestors, they must take it on the same terms their ancestors had it, and submit to all the conditions annexed to such a possession. by this power indeed fathers oblige their children to obedience to themselves, even when they are past minority, and most commonly too subject them to this or that political power: but neither of these by any peculiar right of fatherhood, but by the reward they have in their hands to inforce and recompence such a compliance; and is no more power than what a french man has over an english man, who by the hopes of an estate he will leave him, will certainly have a strong tie on his obedience: and if, when it is left him, he will enjoy it, he must certainly take it upon the conditions annexed to the possession of land in that country where it lies, whether it be france or england.
this gives a considerable hold on the obedience of children, and it connects with something that has been a main topic of this treatise, namely the place of consent in government. i shall explain. the enjoyment of land always involves submitting to the government of the country where the land is. now, it has commonly been supposed that a father could give his offspring a binding obligation to submit to the government of which he himself was a subject, but this is wrong. the obligation to submit to a government is only a condition of owning the land; and the inheritance of an estate that is under that government reaches only those who will accept the estate when it has that condition attached to it. so it is not a natural tie or obligation, but a voluntary submission. every man's children are by nature as free as the man himself or any of his ancestors ever were, and while they are in that freedom they may choose what society they will join themselves to, what commonwealth they will submit to. but if they want to enjoy the inheritance of their ancestors, they must take it on the terms on which their ancestors had it, and submit to all the conditions tied to such ownership. so this power does indeed enable fathers to oblige their children to obedience to themselves even when they are adults, and most commonly to subject their children to this or that political power. but neither of these comes from any special right of fatherhood, but rather from owning the means to enforce and reward such compliance with the father's wishes or with the laws of the commonwealth. it is just the power that a frenchman has over an englishman who hopes to inherit his estate: that hope certainly creates a strong tie on his obedience to the frenchman; and if the estate is left to him, he can enjoy it only on the conditions attached to the possession of land in the country that contains it, whether it be france or england.

thus it was easy, and almost natural for children, by a tacit, and scarce avoidable consent, to make way for the father's authority and government. they had been accustomed in their childhood to follow his direction, and to refer their little differences to him, and when they were men, who fitter to rule them? their little properties, and less covetousness, seldom afforded greater controversies; and when any should arise, where could they have a fitter umpire than he, by whose care they had every one been sustained and brought up, and who had a tenderness for them all? it is no wonder that they made no distinction betwixt minority and full age; nor looked after one and twenty, or any other age that might make them the free disposers of themselves and fortunes, when they could have no desire to be out of their pupilage: the government they had been under, during it, continued still to be more their protection than restraint; and they could no where find a greater security to their peace, liberties, and fortunes, than in the rule of a father.
thus it was easy, almost natural, and virtually inevitable, for children to give their tacit consent to the father's having authority and government. they had been accustomed in their childhood to follow his direction, and to refer their little differences to him; when they were grown up, who would be fitter to rule them? they hadn't much property, or much envy of one anothers goods, so their little differences hadn't become much bigger! where could they find a fitter umpire than he by whose care they had all been sustained and brought up, and who had a tenderness for them all?.

thus the natural fathers of families, by an insensible change, became the politic monarchs of them too: and as they chanced to live long, and leave able and worthy heirs, for several successions, or otherwise; so they laid the foundations of hereditary, or elective kingdoms, under several constitutions and manners, according as chance, contrivance, or occasions happened to mould them. but if princes have their titles in their fathers right, and it be a sufficient proof of the natural right of fathers to political authority, because they commonly were those in whose hands we find, de facto, the exercise of government: i say, if this argument be good, it will as strongly prove, that all princes, nay princes only, ought to be priests, since it is as certain, that in the beginning, the father of the family was priest, as that he was ruler in his own houshold.
thus the natural fathers of families gradually became their politic monarchs as well. and when they happened to live long and to have able and worthy heirs, they laid the foundations for kingdoms whether hereditary or elective with various different kinds of constitutions and procedures, shaped by the effects of chance, contrivance, and particular events. but if monarchs are entitled to their thrones because of their rights as fathers, and if the natural right of fathers to political authority is shown by the mere fact that government has commonly been exercised by fathers, then by the very same inference we can prove that all monarchs and indeed only monarchs should be priests, since it is as certain that in the beginning the father of the family was his household's priest as that he was its ruler.

of political or civil society.
political or civil society

god having made man such a creature, that in his own judgment, it was not good for him to be alone, put him under strong obligations of necessity, convenience, and inclination to drive him into society, as well as fitted him with understanding and language to continue and enjoy it. the first society was between man and wife, which gave beginning to that between parents and children; to which, in time, that between master and servant came to be added: and though all these might, and commonly did meet together, and make up but one family, wherein the master or mistress of it had some sort of rule proper to a family; each of these, or all together, came short of political society, as we shall see, if we consider the different ends, ties, and bounds of each of these.
conjugal society god having made man as a creature who, in god's own judgment, ought not to be alone, drew him strongly by need, convenience, and inclination into society, and equipped him with understanding and language to keep society going and to enjoy it. the first society was between man and wife, which gave rise to the society between parents and children; to which in time the society between master and servant came to be added. all these could and often did meet together, and constitute a single family in which the master or mistress had some appropriate sort of authority. each of these smaller societies, or all together, fell short of being a political society, as we shall see if we consider the different ends, ties, and bounds of each of them.

conjugal society is made by a voluntary compact between man and woman; and tho it consist chiefly in such a communion and right in one another's bodies as is necessary to its chief end, procreation; yet it draws with it mutual support and assistance, and a communion of interests too, as necessary not only to unite their care and affection, but also necessary to their common off-spring, who have a right to be nourished, and maintained by them, till they are able to provide for themselves.
conjugal society is made by a voluntary compact between man and woman. it mainly consists in the togetherness of bodies and right of access to one another's bodies that is needed for procreation, which is its main purpose; but it brings with it mutual support and assistance, and a togetherness of interests too, this being needed to unite their care and affection and also needed by their offspring, who have a right to be nourished and maintained by them till they are old enough to provide for themselves.

for the end of conjunction, between male and female, being not barely procreation, but the continuation of the species; thisconjunction betwixt male and female ought to last, even after procreation, so long as is necessary to the nourishment and support of the young ones, who are to be sustained by those that got them, till they are able to shift and provide for themselves. this rule, which the infinite wise maker hath set to the works of his hands, we find the inferior creatures steadily obey. in those viviparous animals which feed on grass, the conjunction between male and female lasts no longer than the very act of copulation; because the teat of the dam being sufficient to nourish the young, till it be able to feed on grass, the male only begets, but concerns not himself for the female or young, to whose sustenance he can contribute nothing. but in beasts of prey the conjunction lasts longer: because the dam not being able well to subsist herself, and nourish her numerous off-spring by her own prey alone, a more laborious, as well as more dangerous way of living, than by feeding on grass, the assistance of the male is necessary to the maintenance of their common family, which cannot subsist till they are able to prey for themselves, but by the joint care of male and female. the same is to be observed in all birds, (except some domestic ones, where plenty of food excuses the cock from feeding, and taking care of the young brood) whose young needing food in the nest, the cock and hen continue mates, till the young are able to use their wing, and provide for themselves.
the purpose of bonding between male and female is not just procreation but the continuation of the species; meaning that it's not just to have children but to bring them up; so this link between male and female ought to last beyond procreation, so long as is needed for the nourishment and support of the young ones. this rule that our infinite wise maker has imposed on his creatures can be seen to be regularly obeyed by the lower animals. in viviparous animals that feed on grass, the bonding of male with female lasts no longer than the mere act of copulation; because the female's teat is sufficient to nourish the young until they can feed on grass, all the male has to do is to beget, and doesn't concern himself with the female or with the young, to whose nourishment he can't contribute anything. but in beasts of prey the conjunction lasts longer, because the dam isn't able to survive and to nourish her numerous offspring by her own prey alone, this being a more laborious way of living than feeding on grass, as well as a more dangerous one. so the male has to help to maintain their common family, which can't survive unaided until the young are able to prey for themselves. this can be seen also with birds, whose young need food in the nest, so that the cock and the hen continue as mates until the young can fly, and can provide for themselves. (the only exception is some domestic birds; the cock needn't feed and take care of the young brood because there is plenty of food.)

and herein i think lies the chief, if not the only reason, why the male and female in mankind are tied to a longer conjunction than other creatures, viz. because the female is capable of conceiving, and de facto is commonly with child again, and brings forth too a new birth, long before the former is out of a dependency for support on his parents help, and able to shift for himself, and has all the assistance is due to him from his parents: whereby the father, who is bound to take care for those he hath begot, is under an obligation to continue in conjugal society with the same woman longer than other creatures, whose young being able to subsist of themselves, before the time of procreation returns again, the conjugal bond dissolves of itself, and they are at liberty, till hymen at his usual anniversary season summons them again to chuse new mates. wherein one cannot but admire the wisdom of the great creator, who having given to man foresight, and an ability to lay up for the future, as well as to supply the present necessity, hath made it necessary, that society of man and wife should be more lasting, than of male and female amongst other creatures; that so their industry might be encouraged, and their interest better united, to make provision and lay up goods for their common issue, which uncertain mixture, or easy and frequent solutions of conjugal society would mightily disturb.
this brings us to what i think is the chief if not the only reason why the human male and female are bonded together for longer than other creatures. it is this:- long before a human child is able to shift for itself without help from his parents, its mother can again conceive and bear another child; so that the father, who is bound to take care for those he has fathered, is obliged to continue in conjugal society with the same woman for longer than some other creatures. with creatures whose young can make their own way the time of procreation comes around again, the conjugal bond automatically dissolves and the parents are at liberty, till hymen at his usual anniversary season summons them again to choose new mates. we have to admire the wisdom of the great creator: having given man foresight and an ability to make preparations for the future as well dealing with present needs, god made it necessary that the society of man and wife should be more lasting than that of male and female among other creatures; so that their industry might be encouraged and their interests better united to make provision and lay up goods for their shared offspring an arrangement that would be mightily disturbed if the offspring had an uncertain mixture of parentage or if conjugal society were often and easily dissolved.

but tho these are ties upon mankind, which make the conjugal bonds more firm and lasting in man, than the other species of animals; yet it would give one reason to enquire, why this compact, where procreation and education are secured, and inheritance taken care for, may not be made determinable, either by consent, or at a certain time, or upon certain conditions, as well as any other voluntary compacts, there being no necessity in the nature of the thing, nor to the ends of it, that it should always be for life; i mean, to such as are under no restraint of any positive law, which ordains all such contracts to be perpetual.
but though there are these ties that make conjugal bonds firmer and more lasting in humans than in the other species of animals, it is still reasonable to ask: once procreation and upbringing have been secured, and inheritance arranged for, why shouldn't this compact between man and wife be like any other voluntary compact? that is, why shouldn't its continuance depend on the consent of the parties, or on the elapsing of a certain period of time, or on some other condition? it is a reasonable question because neither the compact itself nor the purposes for which it was undertaken require that it should always be for life. (unless of course there is a positive law ordaining that all such contracts be perpetual.)

but the husband and wife, though they have but one common concern, yet having different understandings, will unavoidably sometimes have different wills too; it therefore being necessary that the last determination, i. e. the rule, should be placed somewhere; it naturally falls to the man's share, as the abler and the stronger. but this reaching but to the things of their common interest and property, leaves the wife in the full and free possession of what by contract is her peculiar right, and gives the husband no more power over her life than she has over his; the power of the husband being so far from that of an absolute monarch, that the wife has in many cases a liberty to separate from him, where natural right, or their contract allows it; whether that contract be made by themselves in the state of nature, or by the customs or laws of the country they live in; and the children upon such separation fall to the father or mother's lot, as such contract does determine.
though the husband and wife have a single common concern, they have different views about things and so inevitably they will sometimes differ in what they want to be done. the final decision on any practical question has to rest with someone, and it naturally falls to the man's share, because he is the abler and the stronger of the two. but this applies only to things in which they have a common interest or ownership; it leaves the wife in the full and free possession of what by contract is her special right, and gives the husband no more power over her life than she has over his! the husband's power is so far from that of an absolute monarch that the wife is in many cases free to separate from him, where natural right or their contract allows it whether that contract is made by themselves in the state of nature, or made by the customs or laws of the country they live in. when such a separation occurs, the children go to the father or to the mother, depending on what their contract says.

for all the ends of marriage being to be obtained under politic government, as well as in the state of nature, the civil magistrate doth not abridge the right or power of either naturally necessary to those ends, viz. procreation and mutual support and assistance whilst they are together; but only decides any controversy that may arise between man and wife about them. if it were otherwise, and that absolute sovereignty and power of life and death naturally belonged to the husband, and were necessary to the society between man and wife, there could be no matrimony in any of those countries where the husband is allowed no such absolute authority. but the ends of matrimony requiring no such power in the husband, the condition of conjugal society put it not in him, it being not at all necessary to that state. conjugal society could subsist and attain its ends without it; nay, community of goods, and the power over them, mutual assistance and maintenance, and other things belonging to conjugal society, might be varied and regulated by that contract which unites man and wife in that society, as far as may consist with procreation and the bringing up of children till they could shift for themselves; nothing being necessary to any society, that is not necessary to the ends for which it is made.
all the purposes of marriage can be achieved under political government as well as in the state of nature, so the civil magistrate doesn't interfere with any of the husband's or wife's rights or powers that are naturally necessary for those purposes, namely procreation and mutual support and assistance while they are together. he comes into the picture only when called upon to decide any controversy that may arise between man and wife about the purposes in question.

the society betwixt parents and children, and the distinct rights and powers belonging respectively to them, i have treated of so largely, in the foregoing chapter, that i shall not here need to say any thing of it. and i think it is plain, that it is far different from a politic society.
as for the society between parents and children, and the distinct rights and powers belonging to each: i discussed this fully enough in chapter 6, and needn't say more about it here. i think it is obvious that it is very different from politic society.

master and servant are names as old as history, but given to those of far different condition; for a freeman makes himself a servant to another, by selling him, for a certain time, the service he undertakes to do, in exchange for wages he is to receive: and though this commonly puts him into the family of his master, and under the ordinary discipline thereof; yet it gives the master but a temporary power over him, and no greater than what is contained in the contract between them. but there is another sort of servants, which by a peculiar name we call slaves, who being captives taken in a just war, are by the right of nature subjected to the absolute dominion and arbitrary power of their masters. these men having, as i say, forfeited their lives, and with it their liberties, and lost their estates; and being in the state of slavery, not capable of any property, cannot in that state be considered as any part of civil society; the chief end whereof is the preservation of property.
domestic governance generally master and servant are names as old as history, but very different relationships can be characterized by them. a free man may make himself a servant to someone else by selling to him for a specified time the service that he undertakes to do, in exchange for wages he is to receive. this often puts him into the household of his master, and under its ordinary discipline, but it gives the master a power over him that is temporary and is no greater than what is contained in the contract between them. but there is another sort of servant to which we give the special name slave. a slave is someone who, being a captive taken in a just war, is by the right of nature subjected to the absolute command and arbitrary power of his master. a slave has forfeited his life and with it his liberty; he has lost all his goods, and as a slave he is not capable of having any property; so he can't in his condition of slavery be considered as any part of civil society, the chief purpose of which is the preservation of property.

let us therefore consider a master of a family with all these subordinate relations of wife, children, servants, and slaves, united under the domestic rule of a family; which, what resemblance soever it may have in its order, offices, and number too, with a little commonwealth, yet is very far from it, both in its constitution, power and end: or if it must be thought a monarchy, and the paterfamilias the absolute monarch in it, absolute monarchy will have but a very shattered and short power, when it is plain, by what has been said before, that the master of the family has a very distinct and differently limited power, both as to time and extent, over those several persons that are in it; for excepting the slave (and the family is as much a family, and his power as paterfamilias as great, whether there be any slaves in his family or no) he has no legislative power of life and death over any of them, and none too but what a mistress of a family may have as well as he. and he certainly can have no absolute power over the whole family, who has but a very limited one over every individual in it. but how a family, or any other society of men, differ from that which is properly political society, we shall best see, by considering wherein political society itself consists.
let us then consider a master of a family with all these subordinate relations of wife, children, servants, and slaves, all brought together under the general label of the domestic rule of a family. this may look like a little commonwealth in its structure and rules, but it is really far from that in its constitution, its power and its purpose. but how a family or any other society of men differs from a political society, properly so-called, we shall best see by considering what political society is. political society

man being born, as has been proved, with a title to perfect freedom, and an uncontrouled enjoyment of all the rights and privileges of the law of nature, equally with any other man, or number of men in the world, hath by nature a power, not only to preserve his property, that is, his life, liberty and estate, against the injuries and attempts of other men; but to judge of, and punish the breaches of that law in others, as he is persuaded the offence deserves, even with death itself, in crimes where the heinousness of the fact, in his opinion, requires it. but because no political society can be, nor subsist, without having in itself the power to preserve the property, and in order thereunto, punish the offences of all those of that society; there, and there only is political society, where every one of the members hath quitted this natural power, resigned it up into the hands of the community in all cases that exclude him not from appealing for protection to the law established by it. and thus all private judgment of every particular member being excluded, the community comes to be umpire, by settled standing rules, indifferent, and the same to all parties; and by men having authority from the community, for the execution of those rules, decides all the differences that may happen between any members of that society concerning any matter of right; and punishes those offences which any member hath committed against the society, with such penalties as the law has established: whereby it is easy to discern, who are, and who are not, in political society together. those who are united into one body, and have a common established law and judicature to appeal to, with authority to decide controversies between them, and punish offenders, are in civil society one with another: but those who have no such common appeal, i mean on earth, are still in the state of nature, each being, where there is no other, judge for himself, and executioner; which is, as i have before shewed it, the perfect state of nature.
as i have shown, man was born with a right to perfect freedom, and with an uncontrolled enjoyment of all the rights and privileges of the law of nature, equally with any other man or men in the world. so he has by nature a power not only to preserve his property, that is, his life, liberty and possessions, against harm from other men, but to judge and punish breaches of the law of nature by others punishing in the manner he thinks the offence deserves, even punishing with death crimes that he thinks are so dreadful as to deserve it. but no political society can exist or survive without having in itself the power to preserve the property and therefore to punish the offences of all the members of that society; and so there can't be a political society except where every one of the members has given up this natural power, passing it into the hands of the community in all cases. with all private judgments of every particular member of the society being excluded, the community comes to be the umpire. it acts in this role according to settled standing rules, impartially, the same to all parties; acting through men who have authority from the community to apply those rules. this umpire settles all the disputes that may arise between members of the society concerning any matter of right, and punishes offences that any member has committed against the society, with penalties that the law has established. this makes it easy to tell who are and who aren't members of a political society. those who are united into one body with a common established law and judiciary to appeal to, with authority to decide controversies and punish offenders, are in civil society with one another; whereas those who have no such common appeal (i mean: no such appeal here on earth) are still in the state of nature, each having to judge and to carry out the sentence, because there isn't anyone else to do those things for him.

and thus the commonwealth comes by a power to set down what punishment shall belong to the several transgressions which they think worthy of it, committed amongst the members of that society, (which is the power of making laws) as well as it has the power to punish any injury done unto any of its members, by any one that is not of it, (which is the power of war and peace;) and all this for the preservation of the property of all the members of that society, as far as is possible. but though every man who has entered into civil society, and is become a member of any commonwealth, has thereby quitted his power to punish offences, against the law of nature, in prosecution of his own private judgment, yet with the judgment of offences, which he has given up to the legislative in all cases, where he can appeal to the magistrate, he has given a right to the commonwealth to employ his force, for the execution of the judgments of the commonwealth, whenever he shall be called to it; which indeed are his own judgments, they being made by himself, or his representative. and herein we have the original of the legislative and executive power of civil society, which is to judge by standing laws, how far offences are to be punished, when committed within the commonwealth; and also to determine, by occasional judgments founded on the present circumstances of the fact, how far injuries from without are to be vindicated; and in both these to employ all the force of all the members, when there shall be need.
that's how it comes about that the commonwealth has the power of making laws: that is, the power to set down what punishments are appropriate for what crimes that members of the society commit; and the power of war and peace: that is, the power to punish any harm done to any of its members by anyone who isn't a member; all this being done for the preservation of the property of all the members of the society, as far as is possible. every man who has entered into civil society has thereby relinquished his power to punish offences against the law of nature on the basis of his own private judgment, giving it to the legislature in all cases; and along with that he has also given to the commonwealth a right to call on him to employ his force for the carrying out of its judgments (which are really his own judgments, for they are made by himself or by his representative). so we have the distinction between the legislative and executive powers of civil society. the former are used to judge, by standing laws, how far offences committed within the commonwealth are to be punished; the latter are used to determine, by occasional judgments based on particular circumstances, how far harms from outside the commonwealth are to be vindicated. each branch of a commonwealth's power can employ all the force of all its members, when there is a need for it.

where-ever therefore any number of men are so united into one society, as to quit every one his executive power of the law of nature, and to resign it to the public, there and there only is a political, or civil society. and this is done, where-ever any number of men, in the state of nature, enter into society to make one people, one body politic, under one supreme government; or else when any one joins himself to, and incorporates with any government already made: for hereby he authorizes the society, or which is all one, the legislative thereof, to make laws for him, as the public good of the society shall require; to the execution whereof, his own assistance (as to his own decrees) is due. and this puts men out of a state of nature into that of a commonwealth, by setting up a judge on earth, with authority to determine all the controversies, and redress the injuries that may happen to any member of the commonwealth; which judge is the legislative, or magistrates appointed by it. and where-ever there are any number of men, however associated, that have no such decisive power to appeal to, there they are still in the state of nature.
thus, there is a political (or civil) society when and only when a number of men are united into one society in such a way that each of them forgoes his executive power of the law of nature, giving it over to the public. and this comes about wherever a number of men in the state of nature enter into society to make one people, one body politic, under one supreme government. (a man can become a member of a commonwealth without being in on its creation, namely when someone joins himself to a commonwealth that is already in existence. in doing this he authorizes the society i.e. authorizes it legislature to make laws for him as the public good of the society shall require ) this takes men out of a state of nature into the state of a commonwealth, by setting up a judge on earth with authority to settle all the controversies and redress the harms that are done to any member of the commonwealth. any group of men who have no such decisive power to appeal to are still in the state of nature, no matter what other kind of association they have with one another.

hence it is evident, that absolute monarchy, which by some men is counted the only government in the world, is indeed inconsistent with civil society, and so can be no form of civil-government at all: for the end of civil society, being to avoid, and remedy those inconveniencies of the state of nature, which necessarily follow from every man's being judge in his own case, by setting up a known authority, to which every one of that society may appeal upon any injury received, or controversy that may arise, and which every one of the society ought to obey;*
absolute monarchy this makes it evident that absolute monarchy, which some people regard as the only genuine government in the world, is actually inconsistent with civil society and so can't be a form of civil government at all! consider what civil society is for. it is set up to avoid and remedy the drawbacks of the state of nature that inevitably follow from every man's being judge in his own case, by setting up a known authority to which every member of that society can appeal when he has been harmed or is involved in a dispute an authority that everyone in the society ought to obey.

where-ever any persons are, who have not such an authority to appeal to, for the decision of any difference between them, there those persons are still in the state of nature; and so is every absolute prince, in respect of those who are under his dominion.
so any people who don't have such an authority to appeal to for the settlement of their disputes are still in the state of nature. thus, every absolute monarch is in the state of nature with respect to those who are under his dominion.

for he being supposed to have all, both legislative and executive power in himself alone, there is no judge to be found, no appeal lies open to any one, who may fairly, and indifferently, and with authority decide, and from whose decision relief and redress may be expected of any injury or inconviency, that may be suffered from the prince, or by his order: so that such a man, however intitled, czar, or grand seignior, or how you please, is as much in the state of nature, with all under his dominion, as he is with the rest of mankind: for where-ever any two men are, who have no standing rule, and common judge to appeal to on earth, for the determination of controversies of right betwixt them, there they are still in the state of* nature, and under all the inconveniencies of it, with only this woful difference to the subject, or rather slave of an absolute prince: that whereas, in the ordinary state of nature, he has a liberty to judge of his right, and according to the best of his power, to maintain it; now, whenever his property is invaded by the will and order of his monarch, he has not only no appeal, as those in society ought to have, but as if he were degraded from the common state of rational creatures, is denied a liberty to judge of, or to defend his right; and so is exposed to all the misery and inconveniencies, that a man can fear from one, who being in the unrestrained state of nature, is yet corrupted with flattery, and armed with power.
for an absolute monarch is supposed to have both legislative and executive power in himself alone; so there is no judge or court of appeal that can fairly, impartially, and authoritatively make decisions that could provide relief and compensation for any harm that may be inflicted by the monarch or on his orders. so such a man call him czar or grand seignior or what you will is as much in the state of nature with respect to his subjects as he is with respect to the rest of mankind. this is a special case of the state of nature, because between it and the ordinary state of nature there is this difference, a woeful one for the subject (really, the slave) of an absolute monarch: in the ordinary state of nature a man is free to judge what he has a right to, and to use the best of his power to maintain his rights; whereas in an absolute monarchy, when his property is invaded by the will of his monarch, he not only has no-one to appeal to but he isn't even free to judge what his rights are or to defend them (as though he were a cat or a dog, that can't think for itself). he is, in short, exposed to all the misery and inconveniences that a man can fear from someone who is in the unrestrained state of nature and is also corrupted with flattery and armed with power.

for he that thinks absolute power purifies men's blood, and corrects the baseness of human nature, need read but the history of this, or any other age, to be convinced of the contrary. he that would have been insolent and injurious in the woods of america, would not probably be much better in a throne; where perhaps learning and religion shall be found out to justify all that he shall do to his subjects, and the sword presently silence all those that dare question it: for what the protection of absolute monarchy is, what kind of fathers of their countries it makes princes to be and to what a degree of happiness and security it carries civil society, where this sort of government is grown to perfection, he that will look into the late relation of ceylon, may easily see.
if you think that absolute power purifies men's blood and corrects the baseness of human nature, read history of this or any other age and you'll be convinced of the contrary. a man who would have been insolent and injurious in the forests of america isn't likely to be much better on a throne! possibly even worse, because as an absolute monarch he may have access to learning and religion that will justify everything he does to his subjects, and the power of arms to silence immediately all those who dare question his actions.

in absolute monarchies indeed, as well as other governments of the world, the subjects have an appeal to the law, and judges to decide any controversies, and restrain any violence that may happen betwixt the subjects themselves, one amongst another. this every one thinks necessary, and believes he deserves to be thought a declared enemy to society and mankind, who should go about to take it away. but whether this be from a true love of mankind and society, and such a charity as we owe all one to another, there is reason to doubt: for this is no more than what every man, who loves his own power, profit, or greatness, may and naturally must do, keep those animals from hurting, or destroying one another, who labour and drudge only for his pleasure and advantage; and so are taken care of, not out of any love the master has for them, but love of himself, and the profit they bring him: for if it be asked, what security, what fence is there, in such a state, against the violence and oppression of this absolute ruler? the very question can scarce be borne. they are ready to tell you, that it deserves death only to ask after safety. betwixt subject and subject, they will grant, there must be measures, laws and judges, for their mutual peace and security: but as for the ruler, he ought to be absolute, and is above all such circumstances; because he has power to do more hurt and wrong, it is right when he does it. to ask how you may be guarded from harm, or injury, on that side where the strongest hand is to do it, is presently the voice of faction and rebellion: as if when men quitting the state of nature entered into society, they agreed that all of them but one, should be under the restraint of laws, but that he should still retain all the liberty of the state of nature, increased with power, and made licentious by impunity. this is to think, that men are so foolish, that they take care to avoid what mischiefs may be done them by pole-cats, or foxes; but are content, nay, think it safety, to be devoured by lions.
in absolute monarchies, as well in other governments in the world, the subjects can appeal to the law and have judges to decide disputes and restrain violence among the subjects. everyone thinks this to be necessary, and believes that anyone who threatens it should be thought a declared enemy to society and mankind. but does this come from a true love of mankind and society, and from the charity that we all owe to one another? there is reason to think that it doesn't. there is really no more to it than what any man who loves his own power, profit, or greatness will naturally do to prevent fights among animals that labour and drudge purely for his pleasure and advantage, and so are taken care of not out of any love the master has for them but out of love for himself and for the profit they bring him. if we ask what security, what fence, do we have to protect us from the violence and oppression of this absolute ruler?, the very question is found to be almost intolerable. they are ready to tell you that even to ask about safety from the monarch is an offence that deserves to be punished by death. between subjects, they will grant, there must be measures, laws and judges to produce mutual peace and security: but the ruler ought to be absolute, and is above all such considerations; because he has power to do more hurt and wrong, it is right when he does it! to ask how you may be guarded from harm coming from the direction where the strongest hand is available to do it is to use the voice of faction and rebellion; as if when men left the state of nature and entered into society they agreed that all but one of them should be under the restraint of laws, and that that one should keep all the liberty of the state of nature, increased by power, and made licentious by impunity. this implies that men are so foolish that they would take care to avoid harms from polecats or foxes, but think it is safety to be eaten by lions.

but whatever flatterers may talk to amuse people's understandings, it hinders not men from feeling; and when they perceive, that any man, in what station soever, is out of the bounds of the civil society which they are of, and that they have no appeal on earth against any harm, they may receive from him, they are apt to think themselves in the state of nature, in respect of him whom they find to be so; and to take care, as soon as they can, to have that safety and security in civil society, for which it was first instituted, and for which only they entered into it. and therefore, though perhaps at first, (as shall be shewed more at large hereafter in the following part of this discourse) some one good and excellent man having got a pre-eminency amongst the rest, had this deference paid to his goodness and virtue, as to a kind of natural authority, that the chief rule, with arbitration of their differences, by a tacit consent devolved into his hands, without any other caution, but the assurance they had of his uprightness and wisdom; yet when time, giving authority, and (as some men would persuade us) sacredness of customs, which the negligent, and unforeseeing innocence of the first ages began, had brought in successors of another stamp, the people finding their properties not secure under the government, as then it was, (whereas government has no other end but the preservation of* property) could never be safe nor at rest, nor think themselves in civil society, till the legislature was placed in collective bodies of men, call them senate, parliament, or what you please. by which means every single person became subject, equally with other the meanest men, to those laws, which he himself, as part of the legislative, had established; nor could any one, by his own authority; avoid the force of the law, when once made; nor by any pretence of superiority plead exemption, thereby to license his own, or the miscarriages of any of his dependents. no man in civil society can be exempted from the laws of it: for if any man may do what he thinks fit, and there be no appeal on earth, for redress or security against any harm he shall do; i ask, whether he be not perfectly still in the state of nature, and so can be no part or member of that civil society; unless any one will say, the state of nature and civil society are one and the same thing, which i have never yet found any one so great a patron of anarchy as to affirm.
but whatever may be soothingly said to confuse people's understandings, it doesn't stop men from feeling. and when they see that any man is outside the bounds of the civil society to which they belong, and that they have no appeal on earth against any harm he may do them, they are apt to think they are in the state of nature with respect to that man, and to take care as soon possible to regain the safety and security in civil society which was their only reason for entering into it in the first place. this holds for any such man, whatever his station in life whether he is a monarch or a street-sweeper. in the early stages of a commonwealth it may happen (this being something i shall discuss more fully later on) that one good and excellent man comes to be preeminent, his goodness and virtue causing the others to defer to him as to a kind of natural authority; so that by everyone's tacit consent he comes to be the chief arbitrator of their disputes, with no precautions taken against his abusing that power except their confidence in his uprightness and wisdom. the story could unfold from there in the following way. the careless and unforeseeing innocence of the first years of society which i have been describing establish customs of deference to one individual; some of the successors to the first pre-eminent man are much inferior to him; but the passage of time gives authority to customs (some say it makes then sacred), and so the custom of deference-to-one stays in place. eventually the people find that, although the whole purpose of government is the preservation of property, their property is not safe under this government; and they conclude that the only way for them to be safe and without anxiety the only way for them to think they are in a civil society is for the legislative power to be given to a collective body of men, call it senate, parliament, or what you will. in this way every single person from the highest to the lowest comes to be subject to the laws that he himself, as part of the legislature, has established. no-one has authority to take himself outside the reach of a law once it has been made; nor can anyone by any claim of superiority plead exemption from the laws, so as to license offences against it by himself or his dependents. no man in civil society can be exempted from its laws; for if any man can do what he thinks fit, and there is no appeal on earth for compensation or protection against any harm he may do, isn't he still perfectly in the state of nature, and so not a part or member of that civil society? the only way to avoid the answer yes is to say that the state of nature and civil society are one and the same thing, and i have never yet found anyone who is such an enthusiast for anarchy that he would affirm that.

of the beginning of political societies.
the beginning of political societies

men being, as has been said, by nature, all free, equal, and independent, no one can be put out of this estate, and subjected to the political power of another, without his own consent. the only way whereby any one divests himself of his natural liberty, and puts on the bonds of civil society, is by agreeing with other men to join and unite into a community for their comfortable, safe, and peaceable living one amongst another, in a secure enjoyment of their properties, and a greater security against any, that are not of it. this any number of men may do, because it injures not the freedom of the rest; they are left as they were in the liberty of the state of nature. when any number of men have so consented to make one community or government, they are thereby presently incorporated, and make one body politic, wherein the majority have a right to act and conclude the rest.
men all being naturally free, equal, and independent, no-one can be deprived of this freedom etc. and subjected to the political power of someone else, without his own consent. the only way anyone can strip off his natural liberty and clothe himself in the bonds of civil society is for him to agree with other men to unite into a community, so as to live together comfortably, safely, and peaceably, in a secure enjoyment of their properties and a greater security against outsiders. any number of men can do this, because it does no harm to the freedom of the rest; they are left with the liberty of the state of nature, which they had all along. when any number of men have in this way consented to make one community or government, this immediately incorporates them, turns them into a single body politic in which the majority have a right to act on behalf of the rest and to bind them by its decisions. thus every man, by agreeing with others to make one body politic under one government, puts himself under an obligation to everyone in that society to submit to the decisions of the majority, and to be bound by it. otherwise that is, if he were willing to submit himself only to the majority acts that he approved of the original compact through which he and others incorporated into one society would be meaningless; it wouldn't be a compact if it left him as free of obligations as he had been in the state of nature.

and thus every man, by consenting with others to make one body politic under one government, puts himself under an obligation, to every one of that society, to submit to the determination of the majority, and to be concluded by it; or else this original compact, whereby he with others incorporates into one society, would signify nothing, and be no compact, if he be left free, and under no other ties than he was in before in the state of nature. for what appearance would there be of any compact? what new engagement if he were no farther tied by any decrees of the society, than he himself thought fit, and did actually consent to? this would be still as great a liberty, as he himself had before his compact, or any one else in the state of nature hath, who may submit himself, and consent to any acts of it if he thinks fit. for if the consent of the majority shall not, in reason, be received as the act of the whole, and conclude every individual; nothing but the consent of every individual can make any thing to be the act of the whole: but such a consent is next to impossible ever to be had, if we consider the infirmities of health, and avocations of business, which in a number, though much less than that of a commonwealth, will necessarily keep many away from the public assembly. to which if we add the variety of opinions, and contrariety of interests, which unavoidably happen in all collections of men, the coming into society upon such terms would be only like cato's coming into the theatre, only to go out again. such a constitution as this would make the mighty leviathan of a shorter duration, than the feeblest creatures, and not let it outlast the day it was born in: which cannot be supposed, till we can think, that rational creatures should desire and constitute societies only to be dissolved: for where the majority cannot conclude the rest, there they cannot act as one body, and consequently will be immediately dissolved again.
for if the consent of the majority isn't accepted as the act of the whole body politic and as binding on every individual, the only basis there could be for something's counting as an act of the whole would be its having the consent of every individual. but it is virtually impossible for that ever to be had. even with an assembly much smaller than that of an entire commonwealth, many will be kept from attending by ill-health or by the demands of business. for that reason, and also because of the variety of opinions and conflicts of interests that inevitably occur in any collection of men, it would be absurd for them to come into society on such terms, that is, on the basis that the society as a whole does nothing that isn't assented to by each and every member of it. it would be like cato's coming into the theatre only to go out again.

for if the consent of the majority shall not, in reason, be received as the act of the whole, and conclude every individual; nothing but the consent of every individual can make any thing to be the act of the whole: but such a consent is next to impossible ever to be had, if we consider the infirmities of health, and avocations of business, which in a number, though much less than that of a commonwealth, will necessarily keep many away from the public assembly. to which if we add the variety of opinions, and contrariety of interests, which unavoidably happen in all collections of men, the coming into society upon such terms would be only like cato's coming into the theatre, only to go out again. such a constitution as this would make the mighty leviathan of a shorter duration, than the feeblest creatures, and not let it outlast the day it was born in: which cannot be supposed, till we can think, that rational creatures should desire and constitute societies only to be dissolved: for where the majority cannot conclude the rest, there they cannot act as one body, and consequently will be immediately dissolved again.
such a constitution as this would give the supposedly mighty leviathan a shorter life than the feeblest creatures; it wouldn't live beyond the day it was born. we can't think that this is what rational creatures would want in setting up political societies.

whosoever therefore out of a state of nature unite into a community, must be understood to give up all the power, necessary to the ends for which they unite into society, to the majority of the community, unless they expresly agreed in any number greater than the majority. and this is done by barely agreeing to unite into one political society, which is all the compact that is, or needs be, between the individuals, that enter into, or make up a commonwealth. and thus that, which begins and actually constitutes any political society, is nothing but the consent of any number of freemen capable of a majority to unite and incorporate into such a society. and this is that, and that only, which did, or could give beginning to any lawful government in the world.
so those who out of a state of nature unite into a community must be understood to give up all the power required to secure its purposes to the majority of the community (unless they explicitly agree on some number greater than the majority). they achieve this simply by agreeing to unite into one political society; that's all the compact that is needed between the individuals that create or join a commonwealth. thus, what begins a political society and keeps it in existence is nothing but the consent of any number of free men capable of a majority to unite and incorporate into such a society. this is the only thing that did or could give a beginning to any lawful government in the world.

to this i find two objections made. first, that there are no instances to be found in story, of a company of men independent, and equal one amongst another, that met together, and in this way began and set up a government.
to this i find two objections made. first, history shows no examples of this, no cases where a group of independent and equal men met together and in this way began and set up a government.

secondly, it is impossible of right, that men should do so, because all men being born under government, they are to submit to that, and are not at liberty to begin a new one.
secondly, it is impossible for men rightly to do this, because all men are born under government, and so they are bound to submit to that government and aren't at liberty to begin a new one.

to the first there is this to answer, that it is not at all to be wondered, that history gives us but a very little account of men, that lived together in the state of nature. the inconveniences of that condition, and the love and want of society, no sooner brought any number of them together, but they presently united and incorporated, if they designed to continue together. and if we may not suppose men ever to have been in the state of nature, because we hear not much of them in such a state, we may as well suppose the armies of salmanasser or xerxes were never children, because we hear little of them, till they were men, and imbodied in armies. government is every where antecedent to records, and letters seldom come in amongst a people till a long continuation of civil society has, by other more necessary arts, provided for their safety, ease, and plenty: and then they begin to look after the history of their founders, and search into their original, when they have outlived the memory of it: for it is with commonwealths as with particular persons, they are commonly ignorant of their own births and infancies: and if they know any thing of their original, they are beholden for it, to the accidental records that others have kept of it. and those that we have, of the beginning of any polities in the world, excepting that of the jews, where god himself immediately interposed, and which favours not at all paternal dominion, are all either plain instances of such a beginning as i have mentioned, or at least have manifest footsteps of it.
the history is silent objection here is an answer to the first objection. it is no wonder that history gives us very little account of men living together in the state of nature. as soon as any number of men were brought together by the inconveniences of that state, and by their love of society and their lack of it, they immediately united and incorporated if they planned to continue together. if we can conclude that men never were in the state of nature because we don't hear not much about them in such a state, we can just as well conclude that the soldiers of salmanasser or xerxes were never children because we hear little of them before the time when they were men and became soldiers. in all parts of the world there was government before there were records; writing seldom comes in among a people until a long stretch of civil society has, through other more necessary arts such as agriculture and architecture, provided for their safety, ease, and affluence. when writing does eventually come in, people begin to look into the history of their founders, researching their origins when no memory remains of them; for commonwealths are like individual persons in being, usually, ignorant of their own births and infancies; and when a commonwealth does know something about its origins, they owe that knowledge to the records that others happen to have kept of it. and such records as we have of the beginnings of political states give no support to paternal dominion, except for the jewish state, where god himself stepped in. they are all either plain instances of the kind of beginning that i have described mentioned or at least show clear signs of it.

there are great and apparent conjectures, says he, that these men, speaking of those of peru, for a long time had neither kings nor commonwealths, but lived in troops, as they do this day in florida, the cheriquanas, those of brazil, and many other nations, which have no certain kings, but as occasion is offered, in peace or war, they choose their captains as they please, 1. i. c. 25.
and thus in israel itself the chief business of their judges and first kings seems to have been to be leaders of their armies.

but to conclude, reason being plain on our side, that men are naturally free, and the examples of history shewing, that the governments of the world, that were begun in peace, had their beginning laid on that foundation, and were made by the consent of the people; there can be little room for doubt, either where the right is, or what has been the opinion, or practice of mankind, about the first erecting of governments.
and a little after:

of the ends of political society and government.
the dissolution of government

of the extent of the legislative power.
that is the extent to which this great advocate of monarchical power allows for resistance.

of prerogative.
who is to be the judge of whether the monarch or legislature have acted contrary to their trust? that they have so acted is the sort of thing that can be spread around among the people by discontented and factious men, when all the king has done is to make use of his legitimate prerogative.

here, it is like, the common question will be made, who shall be judge, whether the prince or legislative act contrary to their trust? this, perhaps, ill-affected and factious men may spread amongst the people, when the prince only makes use of his due prerogative. to this i reply, the people shall be judge; for who shall be judge whether his trustee or deputy acts well, and according to the trust reposed in him, but he who deputes him, and must, by having deputed him, have still a power to discard him, when he fails in his trust? if this be reasonable in particular cases of private men, why should it be otherwise in that of the greatest moment, where the welfare of millions is concerned, and also where the evil, if not prevented, is greater, and the redress very difficult, dear, and dangerous?
to this i reply, the people should be judge; for who should judge whether a trustee or deputy has acted well and according to the trust reposed in him, if not the person who deputes him? having deputed him, he must have still a power to discard him when he fails in his trust. if this is reasonable in particular cases of private men, why should it be otherwise in this most important case where the welfare of millions is concerned, and where the threatened evil is greater, and redressing it is very difficult, costly, and dangerous?

but farther, this question, (who shall be judge?) cannot mean, that there is no judge at all: for where there is no judicature on earth, to decide controversies amongst men, god in heaven is judge. he alone, it is true, is judge of the right. but every man is judge for himself, as in all other cases, so in this, whether another hath put himself into a state of war with him, and whether he should appeal to the supreme judge, as jeptha did.
furthermore, the question who is to be the judge? can't mean that there is no judge at all; for when there is no judicature on earth to decide controversies among men, god in heaven is the judge. it is true that god alone is the judge of what is right. but every man is judge for himself, in this case as in all others, of whether another man has put himself into a state of war with him, and whether he should appeal to the supreme judge.

if a controversy arise betwixt a prince and some of the people, in a matter where the law is silent, or doubtful, and the thing be of great consequence, i should think the proper umpire, in such a case, should be the body of the people: for in cases where the prince hath a trust reposed in him, and is dispensed from the common ordinary rules of the law; there, if any men find themselves aggrieved, and think the prince acts contrary to, or beyond that trust, who so proper to judge as the body of the people, (who, at first, lodged that trust in him) how far they meant it should extend? but if the prince, or whoever they be in the administration, decline that way of determination, the appeal then lies no where but to heaven; force between either persons, who have no known superior on earth, or which permits no appeal to a judge on earth, being properly a state of war, wherein the appeal lies only to heaven; and in that state the injured party must judge for himself, when he will think fit to make use of that appeal, and put himself upon it.
if a controversy arises between a king and some of the people, in a matter of great importance where the law is silent, or doubtful, i think the right umpire would be the body of the people. for in cases where the king has a trust placed in him and is dispensed from the common ordinary rules of the law, if any private men are aggrieved and think that the king acts beyond that trust or contrary to it, the body of the people who first placed that trust in him are clearly the best judges of how far they meant the trust to extend. if that way of settling the matter is turned down by the king, or whoever is administering the government, the only court of appeal is in heaven. what we have here is properly a state of war, in which the only appeal is to heaven; and in that state the injured party must judge for himself when it is fit for him to make such an appeal.

to conclude, the power that every individual gave the society, when he entered into it, can never revert to the individuals again, as long as the society lasts, but will always remain in the community; because without this there can be no community, no commonwealth, which is contrary to the original agreement: so also when the society hath placed the legislative in any assembly of men, to continue in them and their successors, with direction and authority for providing such successors, the legislative can never revert to the people whilst that government lasts; because having provided a legislative with power to continue for ever, they have given up their political power to the legislative, and cannot resume it. but if they have set limits to the duration of their legislative, and made this supreme power in any person, or assembly, only temporary; or else, when by the miscarriages of those in authority, it is forfeited; upon the forfeiture, or at the determination of the time set, it reverts to the society, and the people have a right to act as supreme, and continue the legislative in themselves; or erect a new form, or under the old form place it in new hands, as they think good.
to conclude, the power that every individual gave to the society when he entered into it can never revert to the individuals again as long as the society lasts, but will always remain in the community; because without this there can't be a community, a commonwealth, and that would be contrary to the original agreement. so also when the society has placed the legislative power in any assembly of men, to continue in them and their successors with direction and authority for providing such successors, the legislative power can never revert to the people while that government lasts; because having provided a legislature with power to continue for ever, they have given to it their political power and cannot get it back. but if they have set limits to the duration of their legislature, and given this supreme power to some person or assembly only temporarily, or if it is forfeited through the misbehaviour of those in authority, at the set time or at the time of the forfeiture the power does revert to the society, and then the people have a right to act as supreme and to continue the legislature in themselves; or to set up a new form of government, or retain the old form while placing it in new hands, as they see fit.

since you are pleased to inquire what are my thoughts about the mutual toleration of christians in their different professions of religion, i must needs answer you freely that i esteem that toleration to be the chief characteristic mark of the true church. for whatsoever some people boast of the antiquity of places and names, or of the pomp of their outward worship; others, of the reformation of their discipline; all, of the orthodoxy of their faith - for everyone is orthodox to himself - these things, and all others of this nature, are much rather marks of men striving for power and empire over one another than of the church of christ. let anyone have never so true a claim to all these things, yet if he be destitute of charity, meekness, and good-will in general towards all mankind, even to those that are not christians, he is certainly yet short of being a true christian himself. the kings of the gentiles exercise leadership over them, said our saviour to his disciples, but ye shall not be so. the business of true religion is quite another thing. it is not instituted in order to the erecting of an external pomp, nor to the obtaining of ecclesiastical dominion, nor to the exercising of compulsive force, but to the regulating of men's lives, according to the rules of virtue and piety. whosoever will list himself under the banner of christ, must, in the first place and above all things, make war upon his own lusts and vices. it is in vain for any man to unsurp the name of christian, without holiness of life, purity of manners, benignity and meekness of spirit. let everyone that nameth the name of christ, depart from iniquity. thou, when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren, said our lord to peter. it would, indeed, be very hard for one that appears careless about his own salvation to persuade me that he were extremely concerned for mine. for it is impossible that those should sincerely and heartily apply themselves to make other people christians, who have not really embraced the christian religion in their own hearts. if the gospel and the apostles may be credited, no man can be a christian without charity and without that faith which works, not by force, but by love. now, i appeal to the consciences of those that persecute, torment, destroy, and kill other men upon pretence of religion, whether they do it out of friendship and kindness towards them or no? and i shall then indeed, and not until then, believe they do so, when i shall see those fiery zealots correcting, in the same manner, their friends and familiar acquaintance for the manifest sins they commit against the precepts of the gospel; when i shall see them persecute with fire and sword the members of their own communion that are tainted with enormous vices and without amendment are in danger of eternal perdition; and when i shall see them thus express their love and desire of the salvation of their souls by the infliction of torments and exercise of all manner of cruelties. for if it be out of a principle of charity, as they pretend, and love to men's souls that they deprive them of their estates, maim them with corporal punishments, starve and torment them in noisome prisons, and in the end even take away their lives - i say, if all this be done merely to make men christians and procure their salvation, why then do they suffer whoredom, fraud, malice, and such-like enormities, which (according to the apostle) manifestly relish of heathenish corruption, to predominate so much and abound amongst their flocks and people? these, and such-like things, are certainly more contrary to the glory of god, to the purity of the church, and to the salvation of souls, than any conscientious dissent from ecclesiastical decisions, or separation from public worship, whilst accompanied with innocence of life. why, then, does this burning zeal for god, for the church, and for the salvation of souls - burning i say, literally, with fire and faggot - pass by those moral vices and wickednesses, without any chastisement, which are acknowledged by all men to be diametrically opposite to the profession of christianity, and bend all its nerves either to the introducing of ceremonies, or to the establishment of opinions, which for the most part are about nice and intricate matters, that exceed the capacity of ordinary understandings? which of the parties contending about these things is in the right, which of them is guilty of schism or heresy, whether those that domineer or those that suffer, will then at last be manifest when the causes of their separation comes to be judged of he, certainly, that follows christ, embraces his doctrine, and bears his yoke, though he forsake both father and mother, separate from the public assemblies and ceremonies of his country, or whomsoever or whatsoever else he relinquishes, will not then be judged a heretic.
i have been asked what i think about the mutual toleration of christians in their different professions of religion; i have to answer freely that i regard such toleration as the chief identifying mark of the true church. when some people boast of the antiquity of places and names, or of the pomp of their outward worship; others of the reformation of their discipline; everyone of the orthodoxy of their faith (for everyone is orthodox to himself! ), this conduct and other behaviour of the same kind are marks of men striving for power and domination over one another much more than marks of the church of christ. even if someone has an absolutely true claim to all these things, if he lacks charity, meekness, and good-will in general towards all mankind, even to those who are not christians, he certainly falls short of being a true christian himself. the kings of the gentiles exercise leadership over them, said our saviour to his disciples, but you shall not be so. true religion is something different: it exists not to create external pomp, or ecclesiastical dominance, or force of any kind, but rather to create virtuous and pious lives. anyone who wants to enlist in christ's church must above all declare war on his own lusts and vices. no-one will do himself any good by calling himself a christian unless his life is holy, his conduct pure, and his spirit kind and gentle. i would find it hard to believe that someone who is careless about his own salvation is concerned for mine. it's not possible for someone who hasn't really embraced the christian religion in his own heart to try with all his strength to make other people christians. according to the gospel and the apostles, no-one can be a christian unless he has charity and the faith that works through love, not through force. now, i appeal to the consciences of those who persecute, wound, torture, and kill other men on the excuse of religion, whether they do this in a spirit of friendship and kindness. what would it take to convince me that they do? i would need to see those fiery zealots correcting in the same way their friends and members of their own household for their open sins against the gospel's teachings; persecuting with fire and sword their own parishioners who are tainted with enormous vices and at risk of eternal damnation if they don't change, expressing their love and desire for the salvation of their souls by all sorts of cruelties and tortures. the zealots claim that they are acting out of love and care for men's souls when they take their estates, maim them with whips, starve and torture them in stinking prisons, and finally kill them. if that is right if all this is done merely to make men christians and save their souls then why don't these zealots also go after the prostitution, fraud, malice, and so on that are so conspicuous among their flocks? these and their like are certainly more contrary to god's glory, to the church's purity, and to the salvation of souls, than any conscientious dissent from ecclesiastical decisions, or not going to church but leading an innocent life. why does this zeal for god, for the church, and for the salvation of souls zeal that goes all the way to burning people to death let pass without criticism moral vices and wickednesses that everyone thinks are flatly contrary to christian belief, yet stretch itself to the introducing of ceremonies or establishing of opinions that are mostly about fine-grained and intricate matters that ordinary folk can't understand? in these controversies which side is in the right and which guilty of schism or heresy? that will finally be decided when the cause of their separation comes to be judged.

the commonwealth seems to me to be a society of men constituted only for the procuring, preserving, and advancing their own civil interests.
2: the role of the civil magistrate will be used here, in a sense that was common in early modern times, to stand for whoever it is that makes and enforces a state's laws. that includes magistrates in our sense of the word, but also high court judges, legislators, monarchs, and so on. in a given case the magistrate might be a committee, or a system; latin doesn't distinguish he from it; but he will be used throughout this version. the commonwealth seems to me to be a society of men constituted only for the purpose of preserving and promoting the public good.

civil interests i call life, liberty, health, and indolency of body; and the possession of outward things, such as money, lands, houses, furniture, and the like.
by the public good i mean: life, liberty, freedom from bodily illness and pain, and the possession of things such as money, land, houses, furniture, and so on.

it is the duty of the civil magistrate, by the impartial execution of equal laws, to secure unto all the people in general and to every one of his subjects in particular the just possession of these things belonging to this life. if anyone presume to violate the laws of public justice and equity, established for the preservation of those things, his presumption is to be checked by the fear of punishment, consisting of the deprivation or diminution of those civil interests, or goods, which otherwise he might and ought to enjoy. but seeing no man does willingly suffer himself to be punished by the deprivation of any part of his goods, and much less of his liberty or life, therefore, is the magistrate armed with the force and strength of all his subjects, in order to the punishment of those that violate any other man's rights.
the civil magistrate's job is to secure, for the people in general and for each one in particular, the just possession of these worldly things. if anyone tries to violate the laws governing this, he should be deterred by the fear of punishment, consisting of the lessening or outright loss of the goods that he otherwise might and ought to enjoy. because no-one willingly allows himself to be punished by the loss of any of his goods, let alone his liberty or his life, the magistrate in punishing those who violate any other man's rights is armed with the force and strength of all his subjects.

now that the whole jurisdiction of the magistrate reaches only to these civil concernments, and that all civil power, right and dominion, is bounded and confined to the only care of promoting these things; and that it neither can nor ought in any manner to be extended to the salvation of souls, these following considerations seem unto me abundantly to demonstrate.
i could have presented other considerations leading to the same conclusion; but the ones i have given seem to me sufficient to show that the civil government's power relates only to the public good, attending only to the care of the things of this world and having nothing to do with the world to come.

these considerations, to omit many others that might have been urged to the same purpose, seem unto me sufficient to conclude that all the power of civil government relates only to men's civil interests, is confined to the care of the things of this world, and hath nothing to do with the world to come. let us now consider what a church is. a church, then, i take to be a voluntary society of men, joining themselves together of their own accord in order to the public worshipping of god in such manner as they judge acceptable to him, and effectual to the salvation of their souls.
let us now consider what a church is. a church seems to me to be a free society of men who voluntarily come together to worship god in a way that they think is acceptable to him and effective in saving their souls.

i say it is a free and voluntary society. nobody is born a member of any church; otherwise the religion of parents would descend unto children by the same right of inheritance as their temporal estates, and everyone would hold his faith by the same tenure he does his lands, than which nothing can be imagined more absurd. thus, therefore, that matter stands. no man by nature is bound unto any particular church or sect, but everyone joins himself voluntarily to that society in which he believes he has found that profession and worship which is truly acceptable to god. the hope of salvation, as it was the only cause of his entrance into that communion, so it can be the only reason of his stay there. for if afterwards he discover anything either erroneous in the doctrine or incongruous in the worship of that society to which he has joined himself, why should it not be as free for him to go out as it was to enter? no member of a religious society can be tied with any other bonds but what proceed from the certain expectation of eternal life. a church, then, is a society of members voluntarily uniting to that end. it follows now that we consider what is the power of this church and unto what laws it is subject.
i repeat: a free society that men join voluntarily. no-one is born a member of a church; otherwise the religion of parents and grandparents would be inherited by the children in the same way that they inherit wealth and land and you can't imagine anything more absurd than that. so there it is: no-one is by nature bound to any particular church or sect; everyone voluntarily joins the society in which he thinks he has found the creed and mode of worship that is truly acceptable to god. he joined that communion in the hope of salvation, and that hope is the only reason he can have for staying there. if later on he discovers something erroneous in the doctrine or unsuitable in the worship, he should be just as free to leave that society as he was to join it in the first place. he can't be held by any bonds except what come from the certain expectation of eternal life. a church, then, is a society of members voluntarily uniting for that purpose. what we have to consider now is what power this church has and what laws it is subject to.

forasmuch as no society, how free soever, or upon whatsoever slight occasion instituted, whether of philosophers for learning, of merchants for commerce, or of men of leisure for mutual conversation and discourse, no church or company, i say, can in the least subsist and hold together, but will presently dissolve and break in pieces, unless it be regulated by some laws, and the members all consent to observe some order. place and time of meeting must be agreed on; rules for admitting and excluding members must be established; distinction of officers, and putting things into a regular course, and suchlike, cannot be omitted. but since the joining together of several members into this church-society, as has already been demonstrated, is absolutely free and spontaneous, it necessarily follows that the right of making its laws can belong to none but the society itself; or, at least (which is the same thing), to those whom the society by common consent has authorised thereunto.
no society, however free it is, and however slight the basis is for its existing whether it is a society of scholars for doing philosophy, of merchants for transacting business, or of men of leisure for conversation and the exchange of ideas,

some, perhaps, may object that no such society can be said to be a true church unless it have in it a bishop or presbyter, with ruling authority derived from the very apostles, and continued down to the present times by an uninterrupted succession.
can survive and not fall to pieces unless it is regulated by some laws; and the same holds for any church. place and time of meeting must be agreed on; conditions for membership and for exclusion must be established; and so on. but since the members of this society or church joined it freely and without coercion, as i have shown, it follows that the right of making its laws must belong to the society itself or anyway to those whom the society has by common consent authorised to do this.

next, pray observe how great have always been the divisions amongst even those who lay so much stress upon the divine institution and continued succession of a certain order of rulers in the church. now, their very dissension unavoidably puts us upon a necessity of deliberating and, consequently, allows a liberty of choosing that which upon consideration we prefer.
between church and church

these things being thus determined, let us inquire, in the next place: how far the duty of toleration extends, and what is required from everyone by it?
between clerics and others

in the third place, let us see what the duty of toleration requires from those who are distinguished from the rest of mankind (from the laity, as they please to call us) by some ecclesiastical character and office; whether they be bishops, priests, presbyters, ministers, or however else dignified or distinguished. it is not my business to inquire here into the original of the power or dignity of the clergy. this only i say, that, whencesoever their authority be sprung, since it is ecclesiastical, it ought to be confined within the bounds of the church, nor can it in any manner be extended to civil affairs, because the church itself is a thing absolutely separate and distinct from the commonwealth. the boundaries on both sides are fixed and immovable. he jumbles heaven and earth together, the things most remote and opposite, who mixes these two societies, which are in their original, end, business, and in everything perfectly distinct and infinitely different from each other. no man, therefore, with whatsoever ecclesiastical office he be dignified, can deprive another man that is not of his church and faith either of liberty or of any part of his worldly goods upon the account of that difference between them in religion. for whatsoever is not lawful to the whole church cannot by any ecclesiastical right become lawful to any of its members.
let us see what the duty of toleration requires from those who are distinguished from the rest of mankind (the laity, as they like to call us) by some ecclesiastical character and office bishops, priests, presbyters, ministers, and so on. this isn't the place to explore the origins of the clergy's power and dignity. i'll just say this: wherever their authority comes from, its source is ecclesiastical; so it should be kept within the bounds of the church and not extended to civil affairs, because the church is absolutely separate and distinct from the commonwealth. the boundaries of each are settled and immovable. mixing together these two societies which are utterly distinct in how they originated, what they are for, and what they do is tantamount to jumbling together heaven and earth and two things can't be more distinct than those! so no church official, whatever his rank may be, can deprive another man of liberty or of any part of his worldly goods on the grounds that there is a religious difference between them. what isn't lawful for the whole church can't be lawful for any of its members.

but this is not all. it is not enough that ecclesiastical men abstain from violence and rapine and all manner of persecution. he that pretends to be a successor of the apostles, and takes upon him the office of teaching, is obliged also to admonish his hearers of the duties of peace and goodwill towards all men, as well towards the erroneous as the orthodox; towards those that differ from them in faith and worship as well as towards those that agree with them therein. and he ought industriously to exhort all men, whether private persons or magistrates (if any such there be in his church), to charity, meekness, and toleration, and diligently endeavour to ally and temper all that heat and unreasonable averseness of mind which either any man's fiery zeal for his own sect or the craft of others has kindled against dissenters. i will not undertake to represent how happy and how great would be the fruit, both in church and state, if the pulpits everywhere sounded with this doctrine of peace and toleration, lest i should seem to reflect too severely upon those men whose dignity i desire not to detract from, nor would have it diminished either by others or themselves. but this i say, that thus it ought to be. and if anyone that professes himself to be a minister of the word of god, a preacher of the gospel of peace, teach otherwise, he either understands not or neglects the business of his calling and shall one day give account thereof unto the prince of peace. if christians are to be admonished that they abstain from all manner of revenge, even after repeated provocations and multiplied injuries, how much more ought they who suffer nothing, who have had no harm done them, forbear violence and abstain from all manner of ill- usage towards those from whom they have received none! this caution and temper they ought certainly to use towards those. who mind only their own business and are solicitous for nothing but that (whatever men think of them) they may worship god in that manner which they are persuaded is acceptable to him and in which they have the strongest hopes of eternal salvation. in private domestic affairs, in the management of estates, in the conservation of bodily health, every man may consider what suits his own convenience and follow what course he likes best. no man complains of the ill-management of his neighbour's affairs. no man is angry with another for an error committed in sowing his land or in marrying his daughter. nobody corrects a spendthrift for consuming his substance in taverns. let any man pull down, or build, or make whatsoever expenses he pleases, nobody murmurs, nobody controls him; he has his liberty. but if any man do not frequent the church, if he do not there conform his behaviour exactly to the accustomed ceremonies, or if he brings not his children to be initiated in the sacred mysteries of this or the other congregation, this immediately causes an uproar. the neighbourhood is filled with noise and clamour. everyone is ready to be the avenger of so great a crime, and the zealots hardly have the patience to refrain from violence and rapine so long till the cause be heard and the poor man be, according to form, condemned to the loss of liberty, goods, or life. oh, that our ecclesiastical orators of every sect would apply themselves with all the strength of arguments that they are able to the confounding of men's errors! but let them spare their persons. let them not supply their want of reasons with the instruments of force, which belong to another jurisdiction and do ill become a churchman's hands. let them not call in the magistrate's authority to the aid of their eloquence or learning, lest perhaps, whilst they pretend only love for the truth, this their intemperate zeal, breathing nothing but fire and sword, betray their ambition and show that what they desire is temporal dominion. for it will be very difficult to persuade men of sense that he who with dry eyes and satisfaction of mind can deliver his brother to the executioner to be burnt alive, does sincerely and heartily concern himself to save that brother from the flames of hell in the world to come.
it's not enough for an ecclesiastic to abstain from violence, plunder and all sorts of persecution. someone who claims to be a successor of the apostles, and takes on the role of teacher, ought to impress on his hearers the duties of peace and goodwill towards all men, heretical and orthodox. he should urge all his flock private persons and any magistrates there may be there to charity, meekness, and toleration, and try to cool down all the heat and unreasonable hostility towards dissenters that a man may be led into by his own fiery zeal for his own sect or by the crafty manipulations of others. i won't go into details about how and how much church and state would profit if pulpits everywhere proclaimed this doctrine of peace and toleration; if i did, i might seem to be coming down too hard on men whose dignity i don't want to be diminished by myself or anyone else. i'll just say that that is how it ought to be; and if anyone purporting to be a minister of god's word and a preacher of the gospel of peace teaches otherwise, either he doesn't understand his duties or he neglects them, and either way he will be answerable to the prince of peace for this. if christians are to be told and they certainly are not to retaliate even if someone inflicts on them seventy times seven injuries, how could it be right for them to retaliate against people who haven't done them any harm? i mean people who are merely minding their own business, and merely want whatever common opinion may think to worship god in a way that they think is acceptable to him and to cling to the religion that gives them their best chance of eternal salvation. in issues of bodily health in private life, everyone suits his own convenience, and follows the course that he likes best. no-one complains that his neighbour is managing his affairs badly. no-one is angry with someone else for an error committed in sowing his crops or choosing a husband for his daughter. no-one scolds a spendthrift for wasting his money on drink. but if any man doesn't regularly go to church, or doesn't, in church, exactly follow the established ceremonies, or doesn't bring his children to be initiated in the rites of some church or other, this immediately causes an uproar. everyone is ready to avenge this great crime, and the zealots can hardly restrain themselves from punishing the man in advance of his being formally tried and convicted and then condemned to the loss of liberty, goods, or life. if only the ecclesiastical orators in all the sects would put their energies into arguments that would correct the errors of dissidents rather than into punishing the dissenters themselves. they shouldn't make up for their lack of reasons by using the instruments of force, which are unseemly in a churchman's hands. they shouldn't reinforce their eloquence or learning with an appeal to the magistrate's authority; if they do, they'll create a suspicion that despite their front as lovers of the truth they are really using fire and sword in the pursuit of worldly dominance. it won't be easy to convince intelligent men that that someone who dry-eyed and content with himself delivers his brother to the executioner to be burned to death is acting purely from a strong desire to save that brother from the flames of hell in the world to come.

in the last place, let us now consider what is the magistrate's duty in the business of toleration, which certainly is very considerable.
5: the magistrate's role in all this let us now consider magistrate's role in this matter of toleration; it is certainly a big one.

we have already proved that the care of souls does not belong to the magistrate. not a magisterial care, i mean (if i may so call it), which consists in prescribing by laws and compelling by punishments. but a charitable care, which consists in teaching, admonishing, and persuading, cannot be denied unto any man. the care, therefore, of every man's soul belongs unto himself and is to be left unto himself. but what if he neglect the care of his soul? i answer: what if he neglect the care of his health or of his estate, which things are nearlier related to the government of the magistrate than the other? will the magistrate provide by an express law that such a one shall not become poor or sick? laws provide, as much as is possible, that the goods and health of subjects be not injured by the fraud and violence of others; they do not guard them from the negligence or ill-husbandry of the possessors themselves. no man can be forced to be rich or healthful whether he will or no. nay, god himself will not save men against their wills. let us suppose, however, that some prince were desirous to force his subjects to accumulate riches, or to preserve the health and strength of their bodies. shall it be provided by law that they must consult none but roman physicians, and shall everyone be bound to live according to their prescriptions? what, shall no potion, no broth, be taken, but what is prepared either in the vatican, suppose, or in a geneva shop? or, to make these subjects rich, shall they all be obliged by law to become merchants or musicians? or, shall everyone turn victualler, or smith, because there are some that maintain their families plentifully and grow rich in those professions? but, it may be said, there are a thousand ways to wealth, but one only way to heaven. it is well said, indeed, especially by those that plead for compelling men into this or the other way. for if there were several ways that led thither, there would not be so much as a pretence left for compulsion. but now, if i be marching on with my utmost vigour in that way which, according to the sacred geography, leads straight to jerusalem, why am i beaten and ill-used by others because, perhaps, i wear not buskins; because my hair is not of the right cut; because, perhaps, i have not been dipped in the right fashion; because i eat flesh upon the road, or some other food which agrees with my stomach; because i avoid certain by-ways, which seem unto me to lead into briars or precipices; because, amongst the several paths that are in the same road, i choose that to walk in which seems to be the straightest and cleanest; because i avoid to keep company with some travellers that are less grave and others that are more sour than they ought to be; or, in fine, because i follow a guide that either is, or is not, clothed in white, or crowned with a mitre? certainly, if we consider right, we shall find that, for the most part, they are such frivolous things as these that (without any prejudice to religion or the salvation of souls, if not accompanied with superstition or hypocrisy) might either be observed or omitted. i say they are such-like things as these which breed implacable enmities amongst christian brethren, who are all agreed in the substantial and truly fundamental part of religion.
i have shown that the care of souls is not the magistrate's business, which consists in prescribing laws and enforcing them through a penal system; whereas charitable care, which consists in teaching, warning and persuading, is something that any man is free to do. so the responsibility for each man's soul is his; it is to be left to him. you say: what if he neglects the care of his soul? well, what if he neglects the care of his health? or of his estate? they are nearer to the magistrate's jurisdiction than the man's soul is; so is it all right for the magistrate to set up a law explicitly forbidding people to become poor or sick? laws try to secure that a person's goods and health are not harmed by fraud or violence on the part of others; but they don't try to secure them against negligence bad management by the person himself. suppose a prince wanted to force his subjects to accumulate riches: is he to make a law requiring them to become merchants or musicians? or to force everyone to become a shopkeeper or metal-worker, because some people thrive and grow rich in these occupations? or suppose he wants to make his subjects preserve the health and strength of their bodies. will he forbid them by law to consult any but roman physicians and require them to live according to their prescriptions? no medicine or chicken soup that wasn't prepared in the vatican or in a geneva shop really? you say: there are a thousand ways to wealth, but only one way to heaven. well said! and especially by people who want to force men to take this or that way; for if there were several ways to heaven, there would be no shadow of a case to be made for compulsion. well, now: suppose that i am marching vigorously along the road which, according to the sacred geography, leads straight to jerusalem; why do people beat and harass me? they say that it is because i am wearing the wrong kind of boots; or my hair isn't cut in the right way; or i haven't been washed clean; or i eat meat as i walk (or some other food that i eat for the sake of my stomach); or i avoid certain detours that seem to me to lead to brambles or precipices; or i choose, amongst several paths leading the same way, the one that looks straightest and cleanest; or i avoid the company of travellers who are more jolly than they ought to be; or i avoid the company of travellers who are more gloomy than they ought to be; or i follow a guide who is clothed in white or crowned with a mitre; or i follow a guide who is not clothed in white or is not crowned with a mitre. only superstition or hypocrisy could connect such frivolities with religion or the salvation of souls; but if we think straight about the matter we'll see that they are the sorts of things that make enemies of christian brethren who agree on the substantial and truly fundamental part of religion.

but let us grant unto these zealots, who condemn all things that are not of their mode, that from these circumstances are different ends. what shall we conclude from thence? there is only one of these which is the true way to eternal happiness: but in this great variety of ways that men follow, it is still doubted which is the right one. now, neither the care of the commonwealth, nor the right enacting of laws, does discover this way that leads to heaven more certainly to the magistrate than every private man's search and study discovers it unto himself. i have a weak body, sunk under a languishing disease, for which (i suppose) there is one only remedy, but that unknown. does it therefore belong unto the magistrate to prescribe me a remedy, because there is but one, and because it is unknown? because there is but one way for me to escape death, will it therefore be safe for me to do whatsoever the magistrate ordains? those things that every man ought sincerely to inquire into himself, and by meditation, study, search, and his own endeavours, attain the knowledge of, cannot be looked upon as the peculiar possession of any sort of men. princes, indeed, are born superior unto other men in power, but in nature equal. neither the right nor the art of ruling does necessarily carry along with it the certain knowledge of other things, and least of all of true religion. for if it were so, how could it come to pass that the lords of the earth should differ so vastly as they do in religious matters? but let us grant that it is probable the way to eternal life may be better known by a prince than by his subjects, or at least that in this incertitude of things the safest and most commodious way for private persons is to follow his dictates. you will say: what then? if he should bid you follow merchandise for your livelihood, would you decline that course for fear it should not succeed? i answer: i would turn merchant upon the prince's command, because, in case i should have ill- success in trade, he is abundantly able to make up my loss some other way. if it be true, as he pretends, that he desires i should thrive and grow rich, he can set me up again when unsuccessful voyages have broken me. but this is not the case in the things that regard the life to come; if there i take a wrong course, if in that respect i am once undone, it is not in the magistrate's power to repair my loss, to ease my suffering, nor to restore me in any measure, much less entirely, to a good estate. what security can be given for the kingdom of heaven?
suppose we grant to these zealots who condemn all dissent from their ways of doing things that these differences of detail what i have listed as frivolities lead people to follow different roads. what use can we make of that? only one road truly leads to eternal happiness but which one? we aren't sure! i can studiously search for my own answer to this; and that will give me as good a chance of finding the way to heaven as i could get by letting the question be answered by the laws of the land. suppose that i have a weak body, sunk under a wasting disease for which (i think) there is one only remedy, but i don't know what it is. should the magistrate prescribe a remedy for me, just because there's only one and we don't know what it is? if there is only one way for me to escape death, does that make it safe for me to do whatever the magistrate ordains? these are things that everyone ought to inquire into for himself, earnestly and thoughtfully trying to get the answers by his own endeavours, not treating this knowledge as the special possession of some kind of men. monarchs are born with more power than other men, but in nature they are equal. the right to rule, and practised skill in ruling, don't bring with them secure knowledge of other things, least of all of true religion. but suppose that the way to eternal life probably is better known by a monarch than by his subjects, or at least that in the prevailing uncertainty we'll do best by obeying his dictates. you say: if he ordered you to earn your living as a merchant, would you beg off because you doubted if you could succeed in that trade? i answer: i would become a merchant on the monarch's command, because if i failed at that he is well able to make up for my loss in some other way. if he really does (as he says) want me to thrive and grow rich, he can set me up again when unsuccessful trading voyages have broken me. but that's not how things stand with the life to come. if i take the wrong road with regard to that, i am undone, and the magistrate can't repair my loss or ease my suffering. what security can be given for the kingdom of heaven?

perhaps some will say that they do not suppose this infallible judgement, that all men are bound to follow in the affairs of religion, to be in the civil magistrate, but in the church. what the church has determined, that the civil magistrate orders to be observed; and he provides by his authority that nobody shall either act or believe in the business of religion otherwise than the church teaches. so that the judgement of those things is in the church; the magistrate himself yields obedience thereunto and requires the like obedience from others. i answer: who sees not how frequently the name of the church, which was venerable in time of the apostles, has been made use of to throw dust in the people's eyes in the following ages? but, however, in the present case it helps us not. the one only narrow way which leads to heaven is not better known to the magistrate than to private persons, and therefore i cannot safely take him for my guide, who may probably be as ignorant of the way as myself, and who certainly is less concerned for my salvation than i myself am. amongst so many kings of the jews, how many of them were there whom any israelite, thus blindly following, had not fallen into idolatry and thereby into destruction? yet, nevertheless, you bid me be of good courage and tell me that all is now safe and secure, because the magistrate does not now enjoin the observance of his own decrees in matters of religion, but only the decrees of the church. of what church, i beseech you? of that, certainly, which likes him best. as if he that compels me by laws and penalties to enter into this or the other church, did not interpose his own judgement in the matter. what difference is there whether he lead me himself, or deliver me over to be led by others? i depend both ways upon his will, and it is he that determines both ways of my eternal state. would an israelite that had worshipped baal upon the command of his king have been in any better condition because somebody had told him that the king ordered nothing in religion upon his own head, nor commanded anything to be done by his subjects in divine worship but what was approved by the counsel of priests, and declared to be of divine right by the doctors of their church? if the religion of any church become, therefore, true and saving, because the head of that sect, the prelates and priests, and those of that tribe, do all of them, with all their might, extol and praise it, what religion can ever be accounted erroneous, false, and destructive? i am doubtful concerning the doctrine of the socinians, i am suspicious of the way of worship practised by the papists, or lutherans; will it be ever a jot safer for me to join either unto the one or the other of those churches, upon the magistrate's command, because he commands nothing in religion but by the authority and counsel of the doctors of that church?
you may say: the secure judgment about the affairs of religion comes not from the civil magistrate but from the church. what the civil magistrate does is to order us to follow the church's decisions in our actions and our beliefs to ensure by his authority that no-one acts or believes in the business of religion otherwise than the church teaches. the church is the source of judgment about religious matters, and the magistrate makes obedience to the church's judgments a matter of law which everyone the magistrate included is required to obey. i reply: anyone can see that the label the church, which was venerable in the time of the apostles, has often been used in more recent times to throw dust in people's eyes. in our present context, it does nothing for us. the one narrow road to heaven isn't better known to the magistrate than to private persons; so i can't safely be guided by him, who probably knows as little about the way to heaven as i do, and who certainly isn't as concerned for my salvation as i am. ever so many kings of the jews led the blindly following israelites into idolatry and thereby into destruction. yet you tell me to cheer up and accept that everything is now safe and secure, because what the magistrate is enforcing are not his religious decrees but those of the church! of what church? certainly the one he likes best. he who compels me by laws and penalties to join some church isn't bringing his own judgment into this a likely story! what's the difference between his leading me himself and his delivering me over to be led by others? i depend on his will either way; he determines my eternal state either way. if the religion of any church becomes true and saving because it is lavishly praised by its own prelates and priests and hangers-on, what religion will ever be regarded as erroneous, false, and destructive? i am doubtful concerning the doctrine of the socinians; i am suspicious of both the papist and lutheran forms of worship; will it be ever safer for me to join one of those churches on the magistrate's command, because in religion his commands are all based on the authority and advice of the doctors of that church?

but, to speak the truth, we must acknowledge that the church (if a convention of clergymen, making canons, must be called by that name) is for the most part more apt to be influenced by the court than the court by the church. how the church was under the vicissitude of orthodox and arian emperors is very well known. or if those things be too remote, our modern english history affords us fresh examples in the reigns of henry viii, edward vi, mary, and elizabeth, how easily and smoothly the clergy changed their decrees, their articles of faith, their form of worship, everything according to the inclination of those kings and queens. yet were those kings and queens of such different minds in point of religion, and enjoined thereupon such different things, that no man in his wits (i had almost said none but an atheist) will presume to say that any sincere and upright worshipper of god could, with a safe conscience, obey their several decrees. to conclude, it is the same thing whether a king that prescribes laws to another man's religion pretend to do it by his own judgement, or by the ecclesiastical authority and advice of others. the decisions of churchmen, whose differences and disputes are sufficiently known, cannot be any sounder or safer than his; nor can all their suffrages joined together add a new strength to the civil power. though this also must be taken notice of- that princes seldom have any regard to the suffrages of ecclesiastics that are not favourers of their own faith and way of worship.
the fact is that a church (if a convention of clergymen making decrees must be called by that name) is usually more apt to be influenced by the royal court than the court is to be influenced by a church. how the church fared under orthodox and arian emperors is very well known. and if you want something more recent, look to the recent english examples of henry viii, edward vi, mary, and elizabeth: see how easily and smoothly the clergy adapted their decrees -articles of faith, form of worship, everything to the inclinations of those kings and queens. but those kings and queens had such different views in religion, and ordered such different religious conduct, that no sane man (i almost said except an atheist) will say that a sincere and upright worshipper of god could without offence to his conscience or his veneration for god obey all of them. what more is there to say? a king lays down the law for another man's religion on the basis of his own judgment or the ecclesiastical authority and advice of others it's the same thing!.

but, after all, the principal consideration, and which absolutely determines this controversy, is this: although the magistrate's opinion in religion be sound, and the way that he appoints be truly evangelical, yet, if i be not thoroughly persuaded thereof in my own mind, there will be no safety for me in following it. no way whatsoever that i shall walk in against the dictates of my conscience will ever bring me to the mansions of the blessed. i may grow rich by an art that i take not delight in; i may be cured of some disease by remedies that i have not faith in; but i cannot be saved by a religion that i distrust and by a worship that i abhor. it is in vain for an unbeliever to take up the outward show of another man's profession. faith only and inward sincerity are the things that procure acceptance with god. the most likely and most approved remedy can have no effect upon the patient, if his stomach reject it as soon as taken; and you will in vain cram a medicine down a sick man's throat, which his particular constitution will be sure to turn into poison. in a word, whatsoever may be doubtful in religion, yet this at least is certain, that no religion which i believe not to be true can be either true or profitable unto me. in vain, therefore, do princes compel their subjects to come into their church communion, under pretence of saving their souls. if they believe, they will come of their own accord, if they believe not, their coming will nothing avail them. how great soever, in fine, may be the pretence of good-will and charity, and concern for the salvation of men's souls, men cannot be forced to be saved whether they will or no. and therefore, when all is done, they must be left to their own consciences.
but the crucial point that absolutely settles this controversy is this: even if the magistrate's opinion in religion is sound, and the road he tells me to follow really is the one endorsed by the gospel, if i am not thoroughly convinced of that in my own mind i won't reach salvation by following it. no road that i travel along against the dictates of my conscience will ever bring me to the home of the blessed. i can grow rich by the use of skills that give me no pleasure; i can be cured of a disease by remedies that i have no faith in; but i can't be saved by a religion that i distrust or a worship that i dislike. it's pointless for an unbeliever to put on a performance; what god cares about is faith and inner sincerity. amid all the aspects of religion that may be doubtful, one thing is certain: a religion that i don't believe to be true can't be true for me or useful for me. 6: church and state: forms of worship

having thus at length freed men from all dominion over one another in matters of religion, let us now consider what they are to do. all men know and acknowledge that god ought to be publicly worshipped; why otherwise do they compel one another unto the public assemblies? men, therefore, constituted in this liberty are to enter into some religious society, that they meet together, not only for mutual edification, but to own to the world that they worship god and offer unto his divine majesty such service as they themselves are not ashamed of and such as they think not unworthy of him, nor unacceptable to him; and, finally, that by the purity of doctrine, holiness of life, and decent form of worship, they may draw others unto the love of the true religion, and perform such other things in religion as cannot be done by each private man apart.
now that we have freed men from in any way dominating one another in matters of religion, what are they now to do? everyone knows and acknowledges that god ought to be publicly worshipped; otherwise why the pressure to attend religious assemblies? so men should enter into a religious society in which they meet to instruct and improve one another, to declare to the world that they worship god and offer him such service as they aren't ashamed of and as they think worthy of him and acceptable to him, by the purity of doctrine, holiness of life, and decent form of worship to draw others to the love of the true religion, and to perform other religious things that can't be done by each private man on his own.

these religious societies i call churches; and these, i say, the magistrate ought to tolerate, for the business of these assemblies of the people is nothing but what is lawful for every man in particular to take care of- i mean the salvation of their souls; nor in this case is there any difference between the national church and other separated congregations.
i call religious societies churches. the magistrate, i say, ought to tolerate them, because what they are doing is something that it is lawful for any individual to do, namely to take care of the salvation of his soul. and this holds equally for a national church and for independent congregations.

but as in every church there are two things especially to be considered- the outward form and rites of worship, and the doctrines and articles of things must be handled each distinctly that so the whole matter of toleration may the more clearly be understood.
there are two main aspects to any church (1) outward form and rites of worship and (2) doctrines; and these must be dealt with separately if the whole matter of toleration is to be clearly understood. (1) will be the topic of this chapter and the next; (2) will be taken up in chapter 8 here.

concerning outward worship, i say, in the first place, that the magistrate has no power to enforce by law, either in his own church, or much less in another, the use of any rites or ceremonies whatsoever in the worship of god. and this, not only because these churches are free societies, but because whatsoever is practised in the worship of god is only so far justifiable as it is believed by those that practise it to be acceptable unto him. whatsoever is not done with that assurance of faith is neither well in itself, nor can it be acceptable to god. to impose such things, therefore, upon any people, contrary to their own judgment, is in effect to command them to offend god, which, considering that the end of all religion is to please him, and that liberty is essentially necessary to that end, appears to be absurd beyond expression.
(1a) the magistrate has no power to enforce by civil law in any church, even his own the use of any rites or ceremonies in the worship of god; not only because these churches are free societies, but also because no form of divine worship is justifiable unless those who practise it think it is acceptable to god. anything that is not done in good faith is wrong in itself and not acceptable to god. it is self-contradictory to allow a religion the purpose of which is to please god and command its members to behave in ways that will displease god.

but perhaps it may be concluded from hence that i deny unto the magistrate all manner of power about indifferent things, which, if it be not granted, the whole subject-matter of law-making is taken away. no, i readily grant that indifferent things, and perhaps none but such, are subjected to the legislative power. but it does not therefore follow that the magistrate may ordain whatsoever he pleases concerning anything that is indifferent. the public good is the rule and measure of all law-making. if a thing be not useful to the commonwealth, though it be never so indifferent, it may not presently be established by law.
you say: are you denying that the magistrate has any power regarding indifferent things? if he isn't allowed that, there is nothing for law-making to do. no, i readily grant that indifferent things, and perhaps only they, are subject to legislative power. but it doesn't follow that with respect to something indifferent the magistrate may ordain anything he likes. the rule and standard for all law-making is the public good. if something isn't useful to the commonwealth then it may not be required by law, however indifferent it is.

again, things in their own nature indifferent cannot, by any human authority, be made any part of the worship of god- for this very reason: because they are indifferent. for, since indifferent things are not capable, by any virtue of their own, to propitiate the deity, no human power or authority can confer on them so much dignity and excellency as to enable them to do it. in the common affairs of life that use of indifferent things which god has not forbidden is free and lawful, and therefore in those things human authority has place. but it is not so in matters of religion. things indifferent are not otherwise lawful in the worship of god than as they are instituted by god himself and as he, by some positive command, has ordained them to be made a part of that worship which he will vouchsafe to accept at the hands of poor sinful men. nor, when an incensed deity shall ask us, who has required these, or such-like things at your hands? will it be enough to answer him that the magistrate commanded them. if civil jurisdiction extend thus far, what might not lawfully be introduced into religion? what hodgepodge of ceremonies, what superstitious inventions, built upon the magistrate's authority, might not (against conscience) be imposed upon the worshippers of god? for the greatest part of these ceremonies and superstitions consists in the religious use of such things as are in their own nature indifferent; nor are they sinful upon any other account than because god is not the author of them. the sprinkling of water and the use of bread and wine are both in their own nature and in the ordinary occasions of life altogether indifferent. will any man, therefore, say that these things could have been introduced into religion and made a part of divine worship if not by divine institution? if any human authority or civil power could have done this, why might it not also enjoin the eating of fish and drinking of ale in the holy banquet as a part of divine worship? why not the sprinkling of the blood of beasts in churches, and expiations by water or fire, and abundance more of this kind? but these things, how indifferent soever they be in common uses, when they come to be annexed unto divine worship, without divine authority, they are as abominable to god as the sacrifice of a dog. and why is a dog so abominable? what difference is there between a dog and a goat, in respect of the divine nature, equally and infinitely distant from all affinity with matter, unless it be that god required the use of one in his worship and not of the other? we see, therefore, that indifferent things, how much soever they be under the power of the civil magistrate, yet cannot, upon that pretence, be introduced into religion and imposed upon religious assemblies, because, in the worship of god, they wholly cease to be indifferent. he that worships god does it with design to please him and procure his favour. but that cannot be done by him who, upon the command of another, offers unto god that which he knows will be displeasing to him, because not commanded by himself. this is not to please god, or appease his wrath, but willingly and knowingly to provoke him by a manifest contempt, which is a thing absolutely repugnant to the nature and end of worship.
(c) things that are in their own nature indifferent can't by any human authority be made any part of the worship of god. why not? precisely because they are indifferent! indifferent things don't have in themselves any power to propitiate the deity, so no human power or authority can give them enough dignity and excellency to be able to do that. in the common affairs of life the use of indifferent things that god hasn't forbidden is free and lawful, and therefore in those things human authority has a place. but it's not like that with religion. indifferent things are lawful in the worship of god only if god himself has instituted them and by some positive command ordered that they be a part of the worship that he will accept from poor sinful men. and when god angrily asks us who required this?, he won't be satisfied with the answer the magistrate commanded it! if civil jurisdiction goes that far, what can't be lawfully be introduced into religion? what hodgepodge of ceremonies, what superstitious inventions, might not be imposed on worshippers against their consciences but on the magistrate's authority? for most of these ceremonies and superstitions would consist in the religious use of things that are in their own nature indifferent; there's nothing wrong with them except that god isn't their author. the sprinkling of water and the use of bread and wine are, in their own nature and in everyday life, entirely indifferent; could they have been introduced into religion and made a part of divine worship except by divine institution? if any human authority or civil power could have done this, couldn't it also command the eating of fish and drinking of ale in the holy banquet as a part of divine worship? why not the sprinkling of animals blood, purifications by water or fire, and countless other such things? although these things are indifferent in common uses, when they are brought into divine worship without divine authority they are as abominable to god as the sacrifice of a dog. so indifferent things are under the power of the civil magistrate, but that doesn't allow them to be imposed on religious assemblies, because in the worship of god they cease to be indifferent.

but it will be here asked: if nothing belonging to divine worship be left to human discretion, how is it then that churches themselves have the power of ordering anything about the time and place of worship and the like? to this i answer that in religious worship we must distinguish between what is part of the worship itself and what is but a circumstance. that is a part of the worship which is believed to be appointed by god and to be well-pleasing to him, and therefore that is necessary. circumstances are such things which, though in general they cannot be separated from worship, yet the particular instances or modifications of them are not determined, and therefore they are indifferent. of this sort are the time and place of worship, habit and posture of him that worships. these are circumstances, and perfectly indifferent, where god has not given any express command about them. for example: amongst the jews the time and place of their worship and the habits of those that officiated in it were not mere circumstances, but a part of the worship itself, in which, if anything were defective, or different from the institution, they could not hope that it would be accepted by god. but these, to christians under the liberty of the gospel, are mere circumstances of worship, which the prudence of every church may bring into such use as shall be judged most subservient to the end of order, decency, and edification. but, even under the gospel, those who believe the first or the seventh day to be set apart by god, and consecrated still to his worship, to them that portion of time is not a simple circumstance, but a real part of divine worship, which can neither be changed nor neglected.
you say: if no aspect of divine worship is to be left to human discretion, how is it that churches themselves have the power to order when and where etc. worship is to be conducted? my answer to that involves distinguishing the parts of worship from the circumstances of worship. something is a part of the worship if it is believed to be appointed by god and to be pleasing to him, which makes it necessary. circumstances are not in this way necessary. of course worship must occur at some time in some place; but which time and place is left open, so they are indifferent. note that the part/circumstance distinction depends on what is believed to be pleasing to god. for example: among the jews the time and place of worship and the clothing of those who officiated in it were not mere circumstances, but a part of the worship itself; if any of those were varied in any way, they had they thought no chance of its being acceptable to god; whereas to christians these are mere circumstances of worship which each church can vary as it sees fit.

in the next place: as the magistrate has no power to impose by his laws the use of any rites and ceremonies in any church, so neither has he any power to forbid the use of such rites and ceremonies as are already received, approved, and practised by any church; because, if he did so, he would destroy the church itself: the end of whose institution is only to worship god with freedom after its own manner.
(d) just as the magistrate has no power to impose by his laws the use of any rites and ceremonies in any church, so also he has no power to forbid the use of any rites and ceremonies that are already accepted, approved, and practised by a church; because doing that would destroy the church itself as an institution whose sole purpose is to worship god freely in its own way.

you will say, by this rule, if some congregations should have a mind to sacrifice infants, or (as the primitive christians were falsely accused) lustfully pollute themselves in promiscuous uncleanness, or practise any other such heinous enormities, is the magistrate obliged to tolerate them, because they are committed in a religious assembly? i answer: no. these things are not lawful in the ordinary course of life, nor in any private house; and therefore neither are they so in the worship of god, or in any religious meeting. but, indeed, if any people congregated upon account of religion should be desirous to sacrifice a calf, i deny that that ought to be prohibited by a law. meliboeus, whose calf it is, may lawfully kill his calf at home, and burn any part of it that he thinks fit. for no injury is thereby done to any one, no prejudice to another man's goods. and for the same reason he may kill his calf also in a religious meeting. whether the doing so be well-pleasing to god or no, it is their part to consider that do it. the part of the magistrate is only to take care that the commonwealth receive no prejudice, and that there be no injury done to any man, either in life or estate. and thus what may be spent on a feast may be spent on a sacrifice. but if peradventure such were the state of things that the interest of the commonwealth required all slaughter of beasts should be forborne for some while, in order to the increasing of the stock of cattle that had been destroyed by some extraordinary murrain, who sees not that the magistrate, in such a case, may forbid all his subjects to kill any calves for any use whatsoever? only it is to be observed that, in this case, the law is not made about a religious, but a political matter; nor is the sacrifice, but the slaughter of calves, thereby prohibited.
you say: so if some congregations chose to sacrifice infants, or (as the primitive christians were falsely accused) to engage in promiscuous sexual intercourse, or to do any other such dreadful thing, the magistrate would be obliged to tolerate these actions because they are committed in a religious assembly? i answer: those things are not lawful in everyday life or in private homes, so they aren't lawful in the worship of god either. but if people who had gathered for religious purposes wanted to sacrifice a calf, i deny that that should be prohibited by a law. the calf's owner can lawfully kill his calf at home and burn any part of it he likes; for this does no harm to anyone; and for the same reason he may kill his calf also in a religious meeting. whether doing this is pleasing to god is for the calf-killers to think about. the magistrate's only role is to ensure that the commonwealth isn't harmed and that no individual suffers personal or financial harm. if the interests of the commonwealth required all slaughter of beasts to be suspended for a while, so as to rebuild stocks that had been destroyed by some extraordinary epidemic, it's obvious that in that case the magistrate can forbid all his subjects to kill any calves for any purpose. but that law would be made about a political matter, not a religious one; what it prohibits is not sacrificing calves but killing them.

by this we see what difference there is between the church and the commonwealth. whatsoever is lawful in the commonwealth cannot be prohibited by the magistrate in the church. whatsoever is permitted unto any of his subjects for their ordinary use, neither can nor ought to be forbidden by him to any sect of people for their religious uses. if any man may lawfully take bread or wine, either sitting or kneeling in his own house, the law ought not to abridge him of the same liberty in his religious worship; though in the church the use of bread and wine be very different and be there applied to the mysteries of faith and rites of divine worship. but those things that are prejudicial to the commonweal of a people in their ordinary use and are, therefore, forbidden by laws, those things ought not to be permitted to churches in their sacred rites. only the magistrate ought always to be very careful that he do not misuse his authority to the oppression of any church, under pretence of public good.
this shows us how a church differs from the commonwealth. something that is lawful in the commonwealth can't be prohibited by the magistrate in the church. if any man can lawfully take bread or wine in his own house, the law oughtn't to deprive him of that same liberty in his religious worship; though in the church the use of bread and wine is very different because there it is applied to the mysteries of faith and rites of divine worship. but things that are forbidden by law because in their ordinary use they are harmful to the public ought not to be permitted to churches in their sacred rites. but the magistrate should be very careful not to misuse his authority by oppressing some church, on the pretext of securing the public good.

it may be said: what if a church be idolatrous, is that also to be tolerated by the magistrate? i answer: what power can be given to the magistrate for the suppression of an idolatrous church, which may not in time and place be made use of to the ruin of an orthodox one? for it must be remembered that the civil power is the same everywhere, and the religion of every prince is orthodox to himself. if, therefore, such a power be granted unto the civil magistrate in spirituals as that at geneva, for example, he may extirpate, by violence and blood, the religion which is there reputed idolatrous, by the same rule another magistrate, in some neighbouring country, may oppress the reformed religion and, in india, the christian. the civil power can either change everything in religion, according to the prince's pleasure, or it can change nothing. if it be once permitted to introduce anything into religion by the means of laws and penalties, there can be no bounds put to it; but it will in the same manner be lawful to alter everything, according to that rule of truth which the magistrate has framed unto himself. no man whatsoever ought, therefore, to be deprived of his terrestrial enjoyments upon account of his religion. not even americans, subjected unto a christian prince, are to be punished either in body or goods for not embracing our faith and worship. if they are persuaded that they please god in observing the rites of their own country and that they shall obtain happiness by that means, they are to be left unto god and themselves. let us trace this matter to the bottom. thus it is: an inconsiderable and weak number of christians, destitute of everything, arrive in a pagan country; these foreigners beseech the inhabitants, by the bowels of humanity, that they would succour them with the necessaries of life; those necessaries are given them, habitations are granted, and they all join together, and grow up into one body of people. the christian religion by this means takes root in that country and spreads itself, but does not suddenly grow the strongest. while things are in this condition peace, friendship, faith, and equal justice are preserved amongst them. at length the magistrate becomes a christian, and by that means their party becomes the most powerful. then immediately all compacts are to be broken, all civil rights to be violated, that idolatry may be extirpated; and unless these innocent pagans, strict observers of the rules of equity and the law of nature and no ways offending against the laws of the society, i say, unless they will forsake their ancient religion and embrace a new and strange one, they are to be turned out of the lands and possessions of their forefathers and perhaps deprived of life itself. then, at last, it appears what zeal for the church, joined with the desire of dominion, is capable to produce, and how easily the pretence of religion, and of the care of souls, serves for a cloak to covetousness, rapine, and ambition.
7: idolatry you say: what if a church is idolatrous is that also to be tolerated by the magistrate? i answer: what power could the magistrate have to suppress an idolatrous church that couldn't somewhere somewhen be used to ruin an orthodox one? don't forget that the civil power is the same everywhere, and that the religion of every monarch is orthodox to him. if the civil magistrate in geneva, for instance, is given a power that would enable him to wipe out by violence and blood the religion, and in india the magistrate may oppress the christian religion. either the civil power can change everything in religion, according to the monarch's pleasure, or it can change nothing. if it is once allowed to use laws and penalties to introduce something into religion, there will be no way of setting limits to such interference: it will be lawful to alter anything according to the rule of truth i.e. what the magistrate fancies to be the truth. so no man is to be deprived, on account of his religion, of anything that he values. not even native americans, who are subjects of a christian monarch, are to be punished in any way for not accepting our faith and worship. if they think that by observing the rites of their own country they are pleasing god and securing happiness, we should leave this to god and to them. i'll tell you how this situation came about, starting at the beginning. a small weak group of christians with no possessions arrive in a pagan country; they beg the inhabitants appealing to their common humanity to help them with the necessities of life; those necessities are supplied, habitations are granted, and christians and pagans come together as one body of people. the christian religion takes root in that country, and spreads, but isn't yet stronger than the pagan religion. at that time peace, friendship, faith, and equal justice are preserved amongst them. after a while the christian party does become more powerful than the other, because the magistrate becomes a christian. then immediately all compacts are to be broken and all civil rights violated, so that idolatry may be wiped out; and unless these innocent pagans strict observers of the rules of equity and the law of nature, who in no way offend against the laws of the society give up their ancient religion and accept a new and strange one, they are to be turned out of the lands and possessions of their forefathers and perhaps deprived of life itself. and so we see what can be done by zeal for the church combined with the desire for control, and how easily greed, theft and ambition are cloaked in the pretext of religion and of the care of souls.

now whosoever maintains that idolatry is to be rooted out of any place by laws, punishments, fire, and sword, may apply this story to himself. for the reason of the thing is equal, both in america and europe. and neither pagans there, nor any dissenting christians here, can, with any right, be deprived of their worldly goods by the predominating faction of a court- church; nor are any civil rights to be either changed or violated upon account of religion in one place more than another.
if you think that idolatry should be rooted out by laws, punishments, fire, and sword, the above story applies to you, with only the names changed. neither pagans in america or dissenting christians here in europe can rightly be deprived of their worldly goods on religious grounds.

but idolatry, say some, is a sin and therefore not to be tolerated. if they said it were therefore to be avoided, the inference were good. but it does not follow that because it is a sin it ought therefore to be punished by the magistrate. for it does not belong unto the magistrate to make use of his sword in punishing everything, indifferently, that he takes to be a sin against god. covetousness, uncharitableness, idleness, and many other things are sins by the consent of men, which yet no man ever said were to be punished by the magistrate. the reason is because they are not prejudicial to other men's rights, nor do they break the public peace of societies. nay, even the sins of lying and perjury are nowhere punishable by laws; unless, in certain cases, in which the real turpitude of the thing and the offence against god are not considered, but only the injury done unto men's neighbours and to the commonwealth. and what if in another country, to a mahometan or a pagan prince, the christian religion seem false and offensive to god; may not the christians for the same reason, and after the same manner, be extirpated there?
you say: but idolatry shouldn't be tolerated, because it is a sin. if you said idolatry should be avoided, because it is a sin, that would be right. but its being a sin doesn't imply that it should be punished by the magistrate. it's not for the magistrate to wield his sword in punishing everything that he thinks is a sin against god. covetousness, uncharitableness, idleness, and many other things are generally agreed to be sins, but no-one has ever said that they should be punished by the magistrate. that is because they don't interfere with other people's rights, and don't disturb the public peace. even the sins of lying and perjury are nowhere punishable by laws, except in special cases; and even in those the operative feature is not the behaviour's real wickedness or its offence against god but rather the injury done to the offender's neighbours and to the commonwealth. and what if in another country a moslem or a pagan monarch sees the christian religion as false and offensive to god; is it all right for him to wipe out the christians for that reason and in that way?

but it may be urged farther that, by the law of moses, idolaters were to be rooted out. true, indeed, by the law of moses; but that is not obligatory to us christians. nobody pretends that everything generally enjoined by the law of moses ought to be practised by christians; but there is nothing more frivolous than that common distinction of moral, judicial, and ceremonial law, which men ordinarily make use of. for no positive law whatsoever can oblige any people but those to whom it is given. hear, o israel, sufficiently restrains the obligations of the law of moses only to that people. and this consideration alone is answer enough unto those that urge the authority of the law of moses for the inflicting of capital punishment upon idolaters. but, however, i will examine this argument a little more particularly.
you say: by the law of moses, idolaters were to be rooted out. true; but the law of moses is not obligatory to us christians. nobody claims that everything generally enjoined by the law of moses ought to be practised by christians. a promulgated law is binding only on those to whom it is given. hear, o israel sufficiently limits the obligations of the law of moses to that people. this is answer enough to those who urge the authority of the law of moses for inflicting capital punishment on idolaters. but i will go into this matter in a bit more detail.

thus far concerning outward worship. let us now consider articles of faith.
so much for (1) outward worship. let us now turn to (2) faith. 8: church and state: articles of faith

the articles of religion are some of them practical and some speculative. now, though both sorts consist in the knowledge of truth, yet these terminate simply in the understanding, those influence the will and manners. speculative opinions, therefore, and articles of faith (as they are called) which are required only to be believed, cannot be imposed on any church by the law of the land. for it is absurd that things should be enjoined by laws which are not in men's power to perform. and to believe this or that to be true does not depend upon our will. but of this enough has been said already. but. will some say; let men at least profess that they believe. a sweet religion, indeed, that obliges men to dissemble and tell lies, both to god and man, for the salvation of their souls! if the magistrate thinks to save men thus, he seems to understand little of the way of salvation. and if he does it not in order to save them, why is he so solicitous about the articles of faith as to enact them by a law?
(2) some religious doctrines are practical and some speculative. both consist in the knowledge of truth, but they differ in how they relate to the human condition: speculative propositions terminate simply in the understanding, while practical ones relate to the will and to conduct. speculative articles of faith so speculative opinions so-called articles of faith can't be imposed on any church by the law of the land. why not? because they are matters of belief ; what we believe doesn't depend on our will; and a law requiring people to do something they can't do would be absurd. but i've said enough about this already. well, let men at least say that they believe i.e. save their souls by lying to men and to god. what a lovely religion that is! the only reason the magistrate could have for imposing such a law is that he thinks this is a way to save men's souls; but if that is what he thinks, he shows how little he understands the road to salvation.

further, the magistrate ought not to forbid the preaching or professing of any speculative opinions in any church because they have no manner of relation to the civil rights of the subjects. if a roman catholic believe that to be really the body of christ which another man calls bread, he does no injury thereby to his neighbour. if a jew do not believe the new testament to be the word of god, he does not thereby alter anything in men's civil rights. if a heathen doubt of both testaments, he is not therefore to be punished as a pernicious citizen. the power of the magistrate and the estates of the people may be equally secure whether any man believe these things or no. i readily grant that these opinions are false and absurd. but the business of laws is not to provide for the truth of opinions, but for the safety and security of the commonwealth and of every particular man's goods and person. and so it ought to be. for the truth certainly would do well enough if she were once left to shift for herself. she seldom has received and, i fear, never will receive much assistance from the power of great men, to whom she is but rarely known and more rarely welcome. she is not taught by laws, nor has she any need of force to procure her entrance into the minds of men. errors, indeed, prevail by the assistance of foreign and borrowed succours. but if truth makes not her way into the understanding by her own light, she will be but the weaker for any borrowed force violence can add to her. thus much for speculative opinions. let us now proceed to practical ones.
another reason why the magistrate oughtn't to forbid the professing or teaching of any speculative opinions in any church is that such opinions haven't the slightest relevance to the civil rights of the subjects. if a roman catholic believes that something that another man calls bread is really the body of christ, this isn't harming the other man. if a jew believes that the new testament is not the word of god, this belief has no effect on anyone's civil rights. if a pagan has that belief about both testaments, that shouldn't expose him to punishment as a pernicious citizen, because it makes no difference to the magistrate's power or the people's welfare. i readily grant that these opinions are false and absurd; but the civil law is concerned not with the truth of opinions but with the safety and security of the commonwealth and with each individual's goods and person. and there's nothing wrong with that. the truth will do well enough if it is left to its own devices. it isn't taught by laws, and has no need of force to get an entrance into men's minds unlike errors, which profit from outside help!. so much for speculative opinions; now let us turn to practical ones. practical articles of faith

a good life, in which consist not the least part of religion and true piety, concerns also the civil government; and in it lies the safety both of men's souls and of the commonwealth. moral actions belong, therefore, to the jurisdiction both of the outward and inward court; both of the civil and domestic governor; i mean both of the magistrate and conscience. here, therefore, is great danger, lest one of these jurisdictions intrench upon the other, and discord arise between the keeper of the public peace and the overseers of souls. but if what has been already said concerning the limits of both these governments be rightly considered, it will easily remove all difficulty in this matter.
whereas speculative religious opinions have nothing to do with the civil law, the same is not true of speculative religious opinions. living well by which i mean living in a way that is morally good is a considerable part of religion and true piety and is also the business of the civil government; it is crucial to the safety of men's souls and of the commonwealth. so moral actions belong to the jurisdiction of both the outward and inward courts; the civil and domestic governors; the magistrate and the conscience. so we have to be on guard lest one of these jurisdictions infringes on the other, creating discord between the keeper of the public peace and the overseer of the soul. but there won't be any difficulty about this if we remember what i have said about the limits of these two governments.

every man has an immortal soul, capable of eternal happiness or misery; whose happiness depending upon his believing and doing those things in this life which are necessary to the obtaining of god's favour, and are prescribed by god to that end. it follows from thence, first, that the observance of these things is the highest obligation that lies upon mankind and that our utmost care, application, and diligence ought to be exercised in the search and performance of them; because there is nothing in this world that is of any consideration in comparison with eternity. secondly, that seeing one man does not violate the right of another by his erroneous opinions and undue manner of worship, nor is his perdition any prejudice to another man's affairs, therefore, the care of each man's salvation belongs only to himself. but i would not have this understood as if i meant hereby to condemn all charitable admonitions and affectionate endeavours to reduce men from errors, which are indeed the greatest duty of a christian. any one may employ as many exhortations and arguments as he pleases, towards the promoting of another man's salvation. but all force and compulsion are to be forborne. nothing is to be done imperiously. nobody is obliged in that matter to yield obedience unto the admonitions or injunctions of another, further than he himself is persuaded. every man in that has the supreme and absolute authority of judging for himself. and the reason is because nobody else is concerned in it, nor can receive any prejudice from his conduct therein.
every man has an immortal soul that is capable of eternal happiness or misery. its happiness depends on his believing and doing the things that he needs to believe and do if he is to obtain god's favour the things that are prescribed by god for that purpose. two things follow from this. (1) having these beliefs and performing these actions are mankind's chief obligations, and we should work as hard and carefully as we can to find out what they are and to perform them, because nothing in this world outweighs what is at stake in eternity there's just no comparison. (2) because one man doesn't violate the rights of another by his false beliefs and improper manner of worship, and one man's perdition does no harm to another man's affairs, the care of each man's salvation belongs only to himself. i don't mean this to condemn all charitable warnings and attempts to steer men away from error, which are indeed a christian's greatest duty. anyone may try to promote another man's salvation by using as many urgings and arguments as he pleases, but not by any use of force and compulsion, any attempt to dominate. in these matters, no-one is obliged obey someone else's warnings or advice further than he himself is convinced.

these things being thus explained, it is easy to understand to what end the legislative power ought to be directed and by what measures regulated; and that is the temporal good and outward prosperity of the society; which is the sole reason of men's entering into society, and the only thing they seek and aim at in it. and it is also evident what liberty remains to men in reference to their eternal salvation, and that is that every one should do what he in his conscience is persuaded to be acceptable to the almighty, on whose good pleasure and acceptance depends their eternal happiness. for obedience is due, in the first place, to god and, afterwards to the laws.
with regard to eternal salvation, everyone should do what he in his conscience thinks is acceptable to the almighty, on whose good pleasure and acceptance depends his eternal happiness. obedience is due first to god and then to the laws of the land.

but some may ask: what if the magistrate should enjoin anything by his authority that appears unlawful to the conscience of a private person? i answer that, if government be faithfully administered and the counsels of the magistrates be indeed directed to the public good, this will seldom happen. but if, perhaps, it do so fall out, i say, that such a private person is to abstain from the action that he judges unlawful, and he is to undergo the punishment which it is not unlawful for him to bear. for the private judgement of any person concerning a law enacted in political matters, for the public good, does not take away the obligation of that law, nor deserve a dispensation. but if the law, indeed, be concerning things that lie not within the verge of the magistrate's authority (as, for example, that the people, or any party amongst them, should be compelled to embrace a strange religion, and join in the worship and ceremonies of another church), men are not in these cases obliged by that law, against their consciences. for the political society is instituted for no other end, but only to secure every man's possession of the things of this life. the care of each man's soul and of the things of heaven, which neither does belong to the commonwealth nor can be subjected to it, is left entirely to every man's self. thus the safeguard of men's lives and of the things that belong unto this life is the business of the commonwealth; and the preserving of those things unto their owners is the duty of the magistrate. and therefore the magistrate cannot take away these worldly things from this man or party and give them to that; nor change propriety amongst fellow subjects (no not even by a law), for a cause that has no relation to the end of civil government, i mean for their religion, which whether it be true or false does no prejudice to the worldly concerns of their fellow subjects, which are the things that only belong unto the care of the commonwealth.
9: individual conscience but you say: what if the magistrate officially commands something that seems to the conscience of some private person to be wrong? i answer: if government is faithfully administered and the magistrate really is concerned for the public good, this won't often happen. but if it ever does happen, i say, that such a private person should refuse to perform the action that his conscience condemns, and should submit to the punishment for this if it isn't morally wrong for him to undergo it. when a law intended for the public good is privately judged by someone to be wicked, that doesn't invalidate the law or create an excuse. but if the law really does concern things that lie outside the magistrate's authority (e.g. commanding people to accept a strange religion ), then men are not obliged to obey that law against their consciences. political society is instituted purely to secure each man's possession of the things of this life. each man's soul and other heavenly matters don't belong to the commonwealth and can't be subjected to it; they are left entirely to the man himself.

but what if the magistrate believe such a law as this to be for the public good? i answer: as the private judgement of any particular person, if erroneous, does not exempt him from the obligation of law, so the private judgement (as i may call it) of the magistrate does not give him any new right of imposing laws upon his subjects, which neither was in the constitution of the government granted him, nor ever was in the power of the people to grant, much less if he make it his business to enrich and advance his followers and fellow-sectaries with the spoils of others. but what if the magistrate believe that he has a right to make such laws and that they are for the public good, and his subjects believe the contrary? who shall be judge between them? i answer: god alone. for there is no judge upon earth between the supreme magistrate and the people. god, i say, is the only judge in this case, who will retribute unto every one at the last day according to his deserts; that is, according to his sincerity and uprightness in endeavouring to promote piety, and the public weal, and peace of mankind. but what shall be done in the meanwhile? i answer: the principal and chief care of every one ought to be of his own soul first, and, in the next place, of the public peace; though yet there are very few will think it is peace there, where they see all laid waste.
but you say: what if the magistrate believes that some law about those matters is for the public good? i answer: just as the private erroneous judgment of any particular person doesn't exempt him obeying the law, so also the private judgment (for that's what it is) of the magistrate doesn't give him any new right of imposing laws on his subjects a right that wasn't conferred on him in the constitution of the government, and wasn't ever in the power of the people to grant and this holds with extra strength if the magistrate is trying to enrich and advance his followers and co-religionists with goods stolen from others. another question: what if the magistrate believes that he has a right to make such laws and that they are for the public good, and his subjects believe the contrary? who shall judge between them? i answer: god alone there's no earthly judge to decide between the supreme earthly magistrate and the people. on the last day the day of judgment god will treat everyone according to his deserts, i.e. according to his sincerity and uprightness in trying to promote piety, and the public welfare and peace of mankind. you say: what's to be done in the meantime? i answer: each person's chief concern should be for his own soul, and after that for public peace; though there aren't many people who, viewing the wilderness of the contemporary world, will think they are looking at peace.

there are two sorts of contests amongst men, the one managed by law, the other by force; and these are of that nature that where the one ends, the other always begins. but it is not my business to inquire into the power of the magistrate in the different constitutions of nations. i only know what usually happens where controversies arise without a judge to determine them. you will say, then, the magistrate being the stronger will have his will and carry his point. without doubt; but the question is not here concerning the doubtfulness of the event, but the rule of right.
there are two sorts of contests amongst men, one managed by law and the other by force; and their nature is such that whenever law stops, force begins. but the magistrate's power in the various different kinds of nations is not part of my present concern. i only know what usually happens when controversies arise without a judge to settle them. you say: so the magistrate, being the stronger, will prevail. no doubt you right; but our present question concerns what ought to happen, not what probably will happen.

but to come to particulars. i say, first, no opinions contrary to human society, or to those moral rules which are necessary to the preservation of civil society, are to be tolerated by the magistrate. but of these, indeed, examples in any church are rare. for no sect can easily arrive to such a degree of madness as that it should think fit to teach, for doctrines of religion, such things as manifestly undermine the foundations of society and are, therefore, condemned by the judgement of all mankind; because their own interest, peace, reputation, everything would be thereby endangered.
what should not be tolerated to get down to details now, i have four main things to say. (1) the magistrate should not tolerate any doctrines that are contrary to human society or to the moral rules that are needed for civil society to survive. but there are very few such doctrines in any church; because it would be hard for a sect to become so lunatic as to teach, as a matter of religious doctrine, things that clearly undermine the foundations of society and are therefore condemned by the judgment of all mankind; because that would endanger their own interests, their peace, their reputation, everything. (2) an evil that is less visible but more dangerous to the commonwealth occurs when men claim for themselves and their co-religionists some special prerogative that does in fact conflict with the civil right of the community but is covered over with a glittery show of deceitful words. for example: no sect teaches explicitly and openly

another more secret evil, but more dangerous to the commonwealth, is when men arrogate to themselves, and to those of their own sect, some peculiar prerogative covered over with a specious show of deceitful words, but in effect opposite to the civil right of the community. for example: we cannot find any sect that teaches, expressly and openly, that men are not obliged to keep their promise; that princes may be dethroned by those that differ from them in religion; or that the dominion of all things belongs only to themselves. for these things, proposed thus nakedly and plainly, would soon draw on them the eye and hand of the magistrate and awaken all the care of the commonwealth to a watchfulness against the spreading of so dangerous an evil. but, nevertheless, we find those that say the same things in other words. what else do they mean who teach that faith is not to be kept with heretics? their meaning, forsooth, is that the privilege of breaking faith belongs unto themselves; for they declare all that are not of their communion to be heretics, or at least may declare them so whensoever they think fit. what can be the meaning of their asserting that kings excommunicated forfeit their crowns and kingdoms? it is evident that they thereby arrogate unto themselves the power of deposing kings, because they challenge the power of excommunication, as the peculiar right of their hierarchy. that dominion is founded in grace is also an assertion by which those that maintain it do plainly lay claim to the possession of all things. for they are not so wanting to themselves as not to believe, or at least as not to profess themselves to be the truly pious and faithful. these, therefore, and the like, who attribute unto the faithful, religious, and orthodox, that is, in plain terms, unto themselves, any peculiar privilege or power above other mortals, in civil concernments; or who upon pretence of religion do challenge any manner of authority over such as are not associated with them in their ecclesiastical communion, i say these have no right to be tolerated by the magistrate; as neither those that will not own and teach the duty of tolerating all men in matters of mere religion. for what do all these and the like doctrines signify, but that they may and are ready upon any occasion to seize the government and possess themselves of the estates and fortunes of their fellow subjects; and that they only ask leave to be tolerated by the magistrate so long until they find themselves strong enough to effect it?
(a) that men aren't obliged to keep their promises; (b) that monarchs may be dethroned by those who differ from them in religion; or (c) that they alone have dominion of all things. for if these were proposed thus nakedly and plainly, they would soon attract the attention of the magistrate and arouse the commonwealth to be on its guard against the spreading of such a dangerous evil. yet these things are said, though in other words. (a) those who teach that promises to heretics needn't be kept mean that the privilege of breaking promises belongs only to themselves, because they do or easily could when they found it convenient declare that everyone who doesn't belong to their sect is a heretic. (b) what can they mean when they say that kings who are excommunicated forfeit their crowns and kingdoms? they are obviously claiming for themselves the power to depose kings, because they claim that their hierarchy has the sole right to excommunicate anyone. (c) those who maintain that dominion is founded in grace are in effect claiming the possession of all things; for they believe themselves to be the truly pious and faithful. people like these who attribute to those who are faithful, religious, and orthodox i.e. to themselves any special privilege or power in civil matters; or who on pretence of religion claim any sort of authority over people who aren't members of their ecclesiastical communion have no right to be tolerated by the magistrate. nor do those who refuse to accept and teach the duty of tolerating all men in matters of religion. what doctrines like these signify is that these people are ready on any occasion to seize the government and take possession of the estates and fortunes of their fellow subjects, and that all they want from the magistrate is to be tolerated until they have enough power to carry this out. (3) a church can't have any right to be tolerated by the magistrate if it is constituted on a basis such that anyone who joins it is thereby giving himself over to the protection and service of a different monarch. for this would establish a foreign jurisdiction in his own country; the magistrate would be allowing enemy soldiers to be enlisted from among his own people.

again: that church can have no right to be tolerated by the magistrate which is constituted upon such a bottom that all those who enter into it do thereby ipso facto deliver themselves up to the protection and service of another prince. for by this means the magistrate would give way to the settling of a foreign jurisdiction in his own country and suffer his own people to be listed, as it were, for soldiers against his own government. nor does the frivolous and fallacious distinction between the court and the church afford any remedy to this inconvenience; especially when both the one and the other are equally subject to the absolute authority of the same person, who has not only power to persuade the members of his church to whatsoever he lists, either as purely religious, or in order thereunto, but can also enjoin it them on pain of eternal fire. it is ridiculous for any one to profess himself to be a mahometan only in his religion, but in everything else a faithful subject to a christian magistrate, whilst at the same time he acknowledges himself bound to yield blind obedience to the mufti of constantinople, who himself is entirely obedient to the ottoman emperor and frames the feigned oracles of that religion according to his pleasure. but this mahometan living amongst christians would yet more apparently renounce their government if he acknowledged the same person to be head of his church who is the supreme magistrate in the state. lastly, those are not at all to be tolerated who deny the being of a god. promises, covenants, and oaths, which are the bonds of human society, can have no hold upon an atheist. the taking away of god, though but even in thought, dissolves all; besides also, those that by their atheism undermine and destroy all religion, can have no pretence of religion whereupon to challenge the privilege of a toleration. as for other practical opinions, though not absolutely free from all error, if they do not tend to establish domination over others, or civil impunity to the church in which they are taught, there can be no reason why they should not be tolerated.
the frivolous and fallacious distinction between the court and the church is no help here, especially when both court and church are equally subject to the absolute authority of the same person, who not only has power to persuade the members of his church to do whatever he likes either as purely religious, or as contributing to the good of religion but can also order them to do it on pain of eternal fire. it would be absurd for anyone to claim to be a moslem only in his religion and in everything else a faithful subject of a christian magistrate, if he admits that he is bound to give blind obedience to the mufti of constantinople, who himself is entirely obedient to the ottoman emperor and invents the oracles of that religion to suit himself. and this moslem living among christians would renounce their government even more openly if he acknowledged the supreme magistrate in the state to be also the head of his church. (4) no-one should be tolerated who denies the existence of god. promises, covenants, and oaths, which are the bonds of human society, can have no hold on an atheist: this all dissolves in the presence of the thought that there is no god. and atheists can't claim on religious grounds that they should be tolerated! as for other practical opinions, including ones that have some error in them, there's no reason why they shouldn't be tolerated as long as they don't tend to establish domination over others or claim civil impunity for the church in which they are taught.

it remains that i say something concerning those assemblies which, being vulgarly called and perhaps having sometimes been conventicles and nurseries of factions and seditions, are thought to afford against this doctrine of toleration. but this has not happened by anything peculiar unto the genius of such assemblies, but by the unhappy circumstances of an oppressed or ill-settled liberty. these accusations would soon cease if the law of toleration were once so settled that all churches were obliged to lay down toleration as the foundation of their own liberty, and teach that liberty of conscience is every man's natural right, equally belonging to dissenters as to themselves; and that nobody ought to be compelled in matters of religion either by law or force. the establishment of this one thing would take away all ground of complaints and tumults upon account of conscience; and these causes of discontents and animosities being once removed, there would remain nothing in these assemblies that were not more peaceable and less apt to produce disturbance of state than in any other meetings whatsoever. but let us examine particularly the heads of these accusations.
11: gatherings it remains for me to say something about the assemblies that are thought to present a challenge to this doctrine of toleration because they commonly are thought to be hotbeds of sedition and dissent. perhaps some of them have been not because of anything special about assemblies as such but rather because of special features of those assemblies in particular, e.g. troubles relating to oppression and lack of freedom. these accusations would stop if the law of toleration were so settled that all churches had to declare toleration as the basis for their own liberty, and teach that nobody ought to be compelled in matters of religion either by law or force. establishing this one thing would take away the basis for all the anger and disturbances on grounds of conscience, leaving these assemblies as calm and peaceful as any other gatherings. but let us look in more detail into the accusations against assemblies.

you will say that assemblies and meetings endanger the public peace and threaten the commonwealth. i answer: if this be so, why are there daily such numerous meetings in markets and courts of judicature? why are crowds upon the exchange and a concourse of people in cities suffered? you will reply: those are civil assemblies, but these we object against are ecclesiastical. i answer: it is a likely thing, indeed, that such assemblies as are altogether remote from civil affairs should be most apt to embroil them. oh, but civil assemblies are composed of men that differ from one another in matters of religion, but these ecclesiastical meetings are of persons that are all of one opinion. as if an agreement in matters of religion were in effect a conspiracy against the commonwealth; or as if men would not be so much the more warmly unanimous in religion the less liberty they had of assembling. but it will be urged still that civil assemblies are open and free for any one to enter into, whereas religious conventicles are more private and thereby give opportunity to clandestine machinations. i answer that this is not strictly true, for many civil assemblies are not open to everyone. and if some religious meetings be private, who are they (i beseech you) that are to be blamed for it, those that desire, or those that forbid their being public! again, you will say that religious communion does exceedingly unite men's minds and affections to one another and is therefore the more dangerous. but if this be so, why is not the magistrate afraid of his own church; and why does he not forbid their assemblies as things dangerous to his government? you will say because he himself is a part and even the head of them. as if he were not also a part of the commonwealth, and the head of the whole people!
you say: assemblies and meetings endanger the public peace and threaten the commonwealth. i answer: if that is right, then why are there so many meetings every day in markets and law-courts and town squares? you say: those are civil assemblies. what i am objecting to are ecclesiastical ones. i answer: you seem to think that assemblies that are altogether remote from civil affairs are the ones that are most apt to make trouble for them! you say: the members of civil assemblies differ from one another in matters of religion, whereas these ecclesiastical meetings are groups of people who all have the same religious opinion. i reply: do you really think that agreement in matters of religion amounts to a conspiracy against the commonwealth? or that denying men the freedom to assemble would make them less likely to agree in religious matters? you say: civil assemblies are open and free for anyone to enter into, whereas religious gatherings provide a better setting for the hatching of secret plots. i reply: on the contrary, many civil assemblies are not open to everyone, e.g. meetings of guilds and the like. and if some religious meetings are private, whose fault is that? those who want them to be public or those who forbid it? you say: religious togetherness brings men's minds extremely close together, which is a reason to fear them. i reply: then why isn't the magistrate afraid of his own church? why doesn't he forbid their assemblies as things dangerous to his government? you say: because he himself is a part of them, the head of them. i reply: you seem to forget that he is also a part of the commonwealth, and the head of the whole people!

let us therefore deal plainly. the magistrate is afraid of other churches, but not of his own, because he is kind and favourable to the one, but severe and cruel to the other. these he treats like children, and indulges them even to wantonness. those he uses as slaves and, how blamelessly soever they demean themselves, recompenses them no otherwise than by galleys, prisons, confiscations, and death. these he cherishes and defends; those he continually scourges and oppresses. let him turn the tables. or let those dissenters enjoy but the same privileges in civils as his other subjects, and he will quickly find that these religious meetings will be no longer dangerous. for if men enter into seditious conspiracies, it is not religion inspires them to it in their meetings, but their sufferings and oppressions that make them willing to ease themselves. just and moderate governments are everywhere quiet, everywhere safe; but oppression raises ferments and makes men struggle to cast off an uneasy and tyrannical yoke. i know that seditions are very frequently raised upon pretence of religion, but it is as true that for religion subjects are frequently ill treated and live miserably. believe me, the stirs that are made proceed not from any peculiar temper of this or that church or religious society, but from the common disposition of all mankind, who when they groan under any heavy burthen endeavour naturally to shake off the yoke that galls their necks. suppose this business of religion were let alone, and that there were some other distinction made between men and men upon account of their different complexions, shapes, and features, so that those who have black hair (for example) or grey eyes should not enjoy the same privileges as other citizens; that they should not be permitted either to buy or sell, or live by their callings; that parents should not have the government and education of their own children; that all should either be excluded from the benefit of the laws, or meet with partial judges; can it be doubted but these persons, thus distinguished from others by the colour of their hair and eyes, and united together by one common persecution, would be as dangerous to the magistrate as any others that had associated themselves merely upon the account of religion? some enter into company for trade and profit, others for want of business have their clubs for claret. neighbourhood joins some and religion others. but there is only one thing which gathers people into seditious commotions, and that is oppression.
this is how things stand. the magistrate is afraid of other churches, but not of his own, because he is kind and favourable to his church but severe and harsh toward the others. he is indulgent towards his coreligionists, allowing them almost any liberty; members of other churches he uses as slaves and, however blamelessly they live, he rewards them with galleys, prisons, confiscations, and death. he cherishes and defends the members of his own church and continually scourges and oppresses the members of the others. let the tables be turned; or let those dissenters merely enjoy the same privileges in civil affairs as his other subjects, his coreligionists, and he will quickly find that these religious meetings need not be feared: if men enter into seditious conspiracies, they are led to it not by religion in their meetings but their sufferings and oppression. just and moderate governments are everywhere quiet, everywhere safe; injustice and tyranny are always resisted. i know that seditions are often raised on religious pretexts; but it's also true that often people are ill-treated and made to live miserably on religious pretexts. believe me, the troubles that arise don't come from any special features of this or that church or religious society, but from something that all mankind have in common. namely that when they are groaning under a heavy burden they try to get out from under the yoke that hurts their necks. try this thought-experiment. suppose that religion is set aside and that men are classified on the basis of physical features, and that those who have (say) black hair or grey eyes don't enjoy the same privileges as other citizens; that they aren't allowed to buy or sell, or live by their trades; as parents they don't have control of their children's education; they are all either excluded from the benefit of the laws, or meet with biased judges; do you doubt that these people marked off from others by the colour of their hair and eyes, and drawn together by one common persecution would be as dangerous to the magistrate as any others who had come together on religious grounds? people come together for trade and profit, for idly drinking together, for being with neighbours, for being with coreligionists; but there's only one thing that brings people together to plan sedition, and that is oppression.

you will say what, will you have people to meet at divine service against the magistrate's will? i answer: why, i pray, against his will? is it not both lawful and necessary that they should meet? against his will, do you say? that is what i complain of; that is the very root of all the mischief. why are assemblies less sufferable in a church than in a theatre or market? those that meet there are not either more vicious or more turbulent than those that meet elsewhere. the business in that is that they are ill used, and therefore they are not to be suffered. take away the partiality that is used towards them in matters of common right; change the laws, take away the penalties unto which they are subjected, and all things will immediately become safe and peaceable; nay, those that are averse to the religion of the magistrate will think themselves so much the more bound to maintain the peace of the commonwealth as their condition is better in that place than elsewhere; and all the several separate congregations, like so many guardians of the public peace, will watch one another, that nothing may be innovated or changed in the form of the government, because they can hope for nothing better than what they already enjoy - that is, an equal condition with their fellow-subjects under a just and moderate government. now if that church which agrees in religion with the prince be esteemed the chief support of any civil government, and that for no other reason (as has already been shown) than because the prince is kind and the laws are favourable to it, how much greater will be the security of government where all good subjects, of whatsoever church they be, without any distinction upon account of religion, enjoying the same favour of the prince and the same benefit of the laws, shall become the common support and guard of it, and where none will have any occasion to fear the severity of the laws but those that do injuries to their neighbours and offend against the civil peace?
you say: are you really willing to have people meet for divine service against the magistrate's will? i answer: why against his will? their coming together is lawful and necessary. against his will, you say: that's what i am complaining about; it is the root of all the mischief. why are assemblies in a church more frowned on that ones is a theatre or a market? those who meet in a church are not more wicked or more trouble-making than those who meet elsewhere. take away the legal discrimination against them, by changing the laws take away the penalties they are subjected to, and everything will become safe and peaceable. and all the various dissident churches, as guardians of the public peace, will watch one another so that nothing may be changed in the form of the government, because they can hope for nothing better than what they already enjoy that is, equality with their fellow-subjects under a just and moderate government. now if the church to which the monarch belongs is regarded as the chief support of any civil government simply because the monarch is kind and the laws are favourable to it, the government will be even more secure when all good subjects, whatever church they belong to, enjoy the same favour of the monarch and the same benefit of the laws, because they will all become the common support and guard of it.

that we may draw towards a conclusion. the sum of all we drive at is that every man may enjoy the same rights that are granted to others. is it permitted to worship god in the roman manner? let it be permitted to do it in the geneva form also. is it permitted to speak latin in the market-place? let those that have a mind to it be permitted to do it also in the church. is it lawful for any man in his own house to kneel, stand, sit, or use any other posture; and to clothe himself in white or black, in short or in long garments? let it not be made unlawful to eat bread, drink wine, or wash with water in the church. in a word, whatsoever things are left free by law in the common occasions of life, let them remain free unto every church in divine worship. let no man's life, or body, or house, or estate, suffer any manner of prejudice upon these accounts. can you allow of the presbyterian discipline? why should not the episcopal also have what they like? ecclesiastical authority, whether it be administered by the hands of a single person or many, is everywhere the same; and neither has any jurisdiction in things civil, nor any manner of power of compulsion, nor anything at all to do with riches and revenues.
to sum up the position i have been urging: let every man enjoy the same rights as every other. is it permitted to worship god in the roman manner? then let it be permitted to worship in the geneva form also. is it permitted to speak latin in the market-place? then let those who want to speak it also in the church. is it lawful for any man in his own house to kneel, stand, sit, or take any other position? to clothe himself in white or black, in short or in long garments? let it be lawful to eat bread, drink wine, or wash with water in the church. anything that is left free by law in everyday life situations, let it be free also in divine worship in a church. let no man's life, or body, or house, or estate, suffer any kind of harm on these accounts.

ecclesiastical assemblies and sermons are justified by daily experience and public allowance. these are allowed to people of some one persuasion; why not to all? if anything pass in a religious meeting seditiously and contrary to the public peace, it is to be punished in the same manner and no otherwise than as if it had happened in a fair or market. these meetings ought not to be sanctuaries for factious and flagitious fellows. nor ought it to be less lawful for men to meet in churches than in halls; nor are one part of the subjects to be esteemed more blamable for their meeting together than others. every one is to be accountable for his own actions, and no man is to be laid under a suspicion or odium for the fault of another. those that are seditious, murderers, thieves, robbers, adulterers, slanderers, etc., of whatsoever church, whether national or not, ought to be punished and suppressed. but those whose doctrine is peaceable and whose manners are pure and blameless ought to be upon equal terms with their fellow-subjects. thus if solemn assemblies, observations of festivals, public worship be permitted to any one sort of professors, all these things ought to be permitted to the presbyterians, independents, anabaptists, arminians, quakers, and others, with the same liberty. nay, if we may openly speak the truth, and as becomes one man to another, neither pagan nor mahometan, nor jew, ought to be excluded from the civil rights of the commonwealth because of his religion. the gospel commands no such thing. the church which judgeth not those that are without wants it not. and the commonwealth, which embraces indifferently all men that are honest, peaceable, and industrious, requires it not. shall we suffer a pagan to deal and trade with us, and shall we not suffer him to pray unto and worship god? if we allow the jews to have private houses and dwellings amongst us, why should we not allow them to have synagogues? is their doctrine more false, their worship more abominable, or is the civil peace more endangered by their meeting in public than in their private houses? but if these things may be granted to jews and pagans, surely the condition of any christians ought not to be worse than theirs in a christian commonwealth.
if anything happens in a religious meeting that is seditious and contrary to the public peace, it should be punished in exactly the same way as if it had happened in a public square. these meetings ought not to be sanctuaries for trouble-makers and rogues. no-one at such a meeting ought to be blamed for the presence there of a law-breaker. everyone should be accountable for his own actions, and no man is to be laid under a suspicion or odium for the fault of another: those who are seditious, murderers, thieves, robbers, adulterers, slanderers etc. ought to be punished and suppressed, whatever church they belong to even if it's the magistrate's church. but those whose doctrine is peaceable and whose manners are pure and blameless ought to be on equal terms with their fellow-subjects. if people of one religious persuasion are allowed to come together for religious ceremonies, celebrations of feast days, listening to speeches and public worship, the same permission should also be given to arminians, calvinists, lutherans, anabaptists, and socinians. let me tell you the truth about this, openly, man to man: neither pagan nor moslem nor jew should be shut out from the republic because of his religion. the gospel commands no such thing. it isn't wanted by the church, which judgeth not those who are without (1 corinthians 5:12). and it isn't demanded by the commonwealth, which takes in everyone who is honest, peaceable, and hard-working. shall we allow a pagan to deal and trade with us yet not allow him to worship god? if we allow jews to have private houses amongst us, why shouldn't we permit them to have synagogues? is their doctrine more false, their worship more abominable, or civil peace more endangered by their meeting in public than in their private houses? but if these things can be granted to jews and pagans, should any christians be worse off than they are in a christian commonwealth?

you will say, perhaps: yes, it ought to be; because they are more inclinable to factions, tumults, and civil wars. i answer: is this the fault of the christian religion? if it be so, truly the christian religion is the worst of all religions and ought neither to be embraced by any particular person, nor tolerated by any commonwealth. for if this be the genius, this the nature of the christian religion, to be turbulent and destructive to the civil peace, that church itself which the magistrate indulges will not always be innocent. but far be it from us to say any such thing of that religion which carries the greatest opposition to covetousness, ambition, discord, contention, and all manner of inordinate desires, and is the most modest and peaceable religion that ever was. we must, therefore, seek another cause of those evils that are charged upon religion. and, if we consider right, we shall find it to consist wholly in the subject that i am treating of. it is not the diversity of opinions (which cannot be avoided), but the refusal of toleration to those that are of different opinions (which might have been granted), that has produced all the bustles and wars that have been in the christian world upon account of religion. the heads and leaders of the church, moved by avarice and insatiable desire of dominion, making use of the immoderate ambition of magistrates and the credulous superstition of the giddy multitude, have incensed and animated them against those that dissent from themselves, by preaching unto them, contrary to the laws of the gospel and to the precepts of charity, that schismatics and heretics are to be outed of their possessions and destroyed. and thus have they mixed together and confounded two things that are in themselves most different, the church and the commonwealth. now as it is very difficult for men patiently to suffer themselves to be stripped of the goods which they have got by their honest industry, and, contrary to all the laws of equity, both human and divine, to be delivered up for a prey to other men's violence and rapine; especially when they are otherwise altogether blameless; and that the occasion for which they are thus treated does not at all belong to the jurisdiction of the magistrate, but entirely to the conscience of every particular man for the conduct of which he is accountable to god only; what else can be expected but that these men, growing weary of the evils under which they labour, should in the end think it lawful for them to resist force with force, and to defend their natural rights (which are not forfeitable upon account of religion) with arms as well as they can? that this has been hitherto the ordinary course of things is abundantly evident in history, and that it will continue to be so hereafter is but too apparent in reason. it cannot indeed, be otherwise so long as the principle of persecution for religion shall prevail, as it has done hitherto, with magistrate and people, and so long as those that ought to be the preachers of peace and concord shall continue with all their art and strength to excite men to arms and sound the trumpet of war. but that magistrates should thus suffer these incendiaries and disturbers of the public peace might justly be wondered at if it did not appear that they have been invited by them unto a participation of the spoil, and have therefore thought fit to make use of their covetousness and pride as means whereby to increase their own power. for who does not see that these good men are, indeed, more ministers of the government than ministers of the gospel and that, by flattering the ambition and favouring the dominion of princes and men in authority, they endeavour with all their might to promote that tyranny in the commonwealth which otherwise they should not be able to establish in the church? this is the unhappy agreement that we see between the church and state. whereas if each of them would contain itself within its own bounds - the one attending to the worldly welfare of the commonwealth, the other to the salvation of souls - it is impossible that any discord should ever have happened between them. sed pudet hoec opprobria. etc. god almighty grant, i beseech him, that the gospel of peace may at length be preached, and that civil magistrates, growing more careful to conform their own consciences to the law of god and less solicitous about the binding of other men's consciences by human laws, may, like fathers of their country, direct all their counsels and endeavours to promote universally the civil welfare of all their children, except only of such as are arrogant, ungovernable, and injurious to their brethren; and that all ecclesiastical men, who boast themselves to be the successors of the apostles, walking peaceably and modestly in the apostles steps, without intermeddling with state affairs, may apply themselves wholly to promote the salvation of souls.
you say: yes, they should be, because they are more given to factions, tumults, and civil wars. i answer: is this the fault of the christian religion? if it is, then the christian religion is the worst of all religions and oughtn't to be professed by you or tolerated by any commonwealth. but this isn't what christianity is like; it is indeed more strongly opposed to covetousness, ambition, discord, property-disputes etc. than any other religion that has ever existed and it is the most modest and peaceable. so we must look elsewhere for the cause of the evils that are blamed on religion; and if we think straight about the matter we'll find that the entire cause has to do with my present topic, toleration. what has produced all the religious quarrels and wars that have occurred in the christian world is not the (inevitable) diversity of opinions but rather the (avoidable) denial of toleration to those who are of different opinions. the heads of the church, driven by greed and an insatiable hunger for control, have exploited the magistrates ambition (often out of control) and the (always stupid) superstition of the multitude, arousing the populace against those who dissent from themselves, by preaching to them, contrary to the laws of the gospel and to the precepts of charity, that schismatics and heretics should be deprived of their possessions and wiped out. in this they have mixed together two things that are really utterly different, the church and the commonwealth. when men are stripped of the goods they have acquired by honest work, industry, and, contrary to all the laws of equity, human and divine, are exposed to other men's violence and robbery, it is very difficult for them to put up with this patiently. especially when they are otherwise entirely blameless, and the reason for this treatment lies right outside the magistrate's jurisdiction and is a matter for the individual's conscience and the salvation of his soul, for which he is accountable only to god. when these men, growing weary of the evils under which they labour, eventually come to think it lawful for them to resist force with force, and to defend their natural rights (which are not forfeitable on account of religion) with arms as well as they can, what else could we expect? to learn that this has in the past been the ordinary course of things, study history; to know that it will continue in the future, think! it is bound to be like that as long as the principle of religious persecution goes on prevailing with the magistrate and the people, and as long as those who ought to preach peace and harmony go on deploying all their skill and strength to arouse men to arms and sound the trumpet of war. it would be astonishing that magistrates should allow these incendiaries and disturbers of the public peace if we couldn't see that they have been invited by them to a share of the spoils, and have been led to make use of their covetousness and pride as means to increasing their own power.

perhaps it may not be amiss to add a few things concerning heresy and schism. a turk is not, nor can be, either heretic or schismatic to a christian; and if any man fall off from the christian faith to mahometism, he does not thereby become a heretic or schismatic, but an apostate and an infidel. this nobody doubts of; and by this it appears that men of different religions cannot be heretics or schismatics to one another.
12: heresy and schism it may be worthwhile to say a little about heresy and schism. a moslem isn't and can't be either a heretic or a schismatic to a christian; and if anyone leaves the christian faith and joins islam, that doesn't make him a heretic or a schismatic it makes him an apostate and an infidel. this is entirely uncontroversial; and it shows that men of different religions can't be heretics or schismatics relative to one another.

we are to inquire, therefore, what men are of the same religion. concerning which it is manifest that those who have one and the same rule of faith and worship are of the same religion; and those who have not the same rule of faith and worship are of different religions. for since all things that belong unto that religion are contained in that rule, it follows necessarily that those who agree in one rule are of one and the same religion, and vice versa. thus turks and christians are of different religions, because these take the holy scriptures to be the rule of their religion, and those the alcoran. and for the same reason there may be different religions also even amongst christians. the papists and lutherans, though both of them profess faith in christ and are therefore called christians, yet are not both of the same religion, because these acknowledge nothing but the holy scriptures to be the rule and foundation of their religion, those take in also traditions and the decrees of popes and of these together make the rule of their religion; and thus the christians of st. john (as they are called) and the christians of geneva are of different religions, because these also take only the scriptures, and those i know not what traditions, for the rule of their religion.
what we have to look into, then, is how the concepts of heresy and schism work in relation to men who are of the same religion. it's clear those who have the very same rule of faith and worship have the same religion, and those whose faith and worship are different belong to different religions. that is because everything that belongs to that religion is contained in that rule, so that those who have the same rule belong to one and the same religion, and those who haven't don't. thus moslems and christians are of different religions because christians take the holy scriptures as the rule of their religion, and moslems take the koran. and by that criterion there can be different religions amongst christians. papists and lutherans, though both profess faith in christ and are therefore called christians are not of the same religion, because lutherans acknowledge only the holy scriptures as the rule and foundation of their religion, while papists have as their rule not only the holy scriptures but also traditions and the decrees of popes.

this being settled, it follows, first, that heresy is a separation made in ecclesiastical communion between men of the same religion for some opinions no way contained in the rule itself; and, secondly, that amongst those who acknowledge nothing but the holy scriptures to be their rule of faith, heresy is a separation made in their christian communion for opinions not contained in the express words of scripture. now this separation may be made in a twofold manner:
what heresy is

when the greater part, or by the magistrate's patronage the stronger part, of the church separates itself from others by excluding them out of her communion because they will not profess their belief of certain opinions which are not the express words of the scripture. for it is not the paucity of those that are separated, nor the authority of the magistrate, that can make any man guilty of heresy, but he only is a heretic who divides the church into parts, introduces names and marks of distinction, and voluntarily makes a separation because of such opinions.
from this it follows that heresy is a split in ecclesiastical communion between men who have the same religion but differ on some doctrine that isn't contained in the rule that defines the religion; and that among those who recognize only the holy scriptures as their rule of faith, heresy is a split in their christian communion concerning doctrines that aren't explicitly contained in scripture. this split among christians can happen in either of two ways. (1) it happens when the greater part of the church or the stronger part (thanks to the magistrate's patronage) separates itself from the rest, excluding them from the church's communion because they refuse to declare their belief in certain opinions that aren't explicitly stated in scripture. what makes a group heretical is not the smallness of their numbers or the authority of the magistrate; someone is a heretic if (and only if) is it he who on the basis of such opinions divides the church into parts, introduces names and marks of distinction, deliberately creates a split because of those opinions.

when any one separates himself from the communion of a church because that church does not publicly profess some certain opinions which the holy scriptures do not expressly teach.
(2) heresy occurs when someone separates himself from the communion of a church because the church doesn't publicly profess certain opinions that the holy scriptures don't clearly teach.

both these are heretics because they err in fundamentals, and they err obstinately against knowledge; for when they have determined the holy scriptures to be the only foundation of faith, they nevertheless lay down certain propositions as fundamental which are not in the scripture, and because others will not acknowledge these additional opinions of theirs, nor build upon them as if they were necessary and fundamental, they therefore make a separation in the church, either by withdrawing themselves from others, or expelling the others from them. nor does it signify anything for them to say that their confessions and symbols are agreeable to scripture and to the analogy of faith; for if they be conceived in the express words of scripture, there can be no question about them, because those things are acknowledged by all christians to be of divine inspiration and therefore fundamental. but if they say that the articles which they require to be professed are consequences deduced from the scripture, it is undoubtedly well done of them who believe and profess such things as seem unto them so agreeable to the rule of faith. but it would be very ill done to obtrude those things upon others unto whom they do not seem to be the indubitable doctrines of the scripture; and to make a separation for such things as these, which neither are nor can be fundamental, is to become heretics; for i do not think there is any man arrived to that degree of madness as that he dare give out his consequences and interpretations of scripture as divine inspirations and compare the articles of faith that he has framed according to his own fancy with the authority of scripture. i know there are some propositions so evidently agreeable to scripture that nobody can deny them to be drawn from thence, but about those, therefore, there can be no difference. this only i say - that however clearly we may think this or the other doctrine to be deduced from scripture, we ought not therefore to impose it upon others as a necessary article of faith because we believe it to be agreeable to the rule of faith, unless we would be content also that other doctrines should be imposed upon us in the same manner, and that we should be compelled to receive and profess all the different and contradictory opinions of lutherans, calvinists, remonstrants, anabaptists, and other sects which the contrivers of symbols, systems, and confessions are accustomed to deliver to their followers as genuine and necessary deductions from the holy scripture. i cannot but wonder at the extravagant arrogance of those men who think that they themselves can explain things necessary to salvation more clearly than the holy ghost, the eternal and infinite wisdom of god.
both these the group and the individual are heretics because they are wrong about fundamentals, and obstinately go against prudence and knowledge. when they specified that the holy scriptures were to be the only foundation of faith, they also gave a fundamental status to certain propositions that are not in scripture, and because others won't accept these additional opinions of theirs as necessary and fundamental, they create a split in the church either (2) by withdrawing from it or (1) by expelling others from it. it doesn't help their position to say that their favoured opinions fit with scripture and with the analogy of faith. if they are drawn up in the words of scripture, there can be no question about them, because all christians acknowledge those things as being divinely inspired and therefore fundamental. but if you (i'm speaking to a heretic now) say only that the items you want to be professed are consequences of what is in scripture, i say believing and professing things that seem to you agreeable to the rule of faith well done! but trying to force those things down the throats of people who don't see them as indubitable scriptural doctrines not well done! to create a split because of things like these, which aren't and can't be fundamental, is to be a heretic. i don't think that any man is so lunatic as to dare to hawk his consequences and interpretations of scripture as divine inspirations and to put the articles of faith that he has constructed on a par with the authority of scripture. i know some propositions are so evidently agreeable to scripture that they can't be denied to be consequences of it; and there can't be any difference of opinion about those. and just for that reason, they aren't relevant to our present topic of heresy, where by definition there always is a difference of opinion. returning now to that topic (and again i am addressing the heretic): however clearly it seems to you that something-or-other follows from scripture, you shouldn't force it on others because you believe it to be agreeable to the rule of faith or not unless you think it would be fair enough for other doctrines to be imposed on you in the same way. that would involve you in having to accept and profess all the different and contradictory opinions of lutherans, calvinists, arminians, anabaptists, and so on opinions which the manufacturers of symbols, systems and confessions pass out to their followers as genuine and necessary deductions from the holy scripture. i'm amazed at the rash arrogance of men who think that they can explain things necessary to salvation more clearly than the holy ghost, the eternal and infinite wisdom of god.

thus much concerning heresy, which word in common use is applied only to the doctrinal part of religion. let us now consider schism, which is a crime near akin to it; for both these words seem unto me to signify an ill-grounded separation in ecclesiastical communion made about things not necessary. but since use, which is the supreme law in matter of language, has determined that heresy relates to errors in faith, and schism to those in worship or discipline, we must consider them under that distinction.
what schism is so much for heresy, a word that in common usage is applied only to the doctrinal part of religion. let us now consider schism. this is a crime like heresy, for both these words seem to me to signify an ill-grounded split in an ecclesiastical communion, arising from things that are not necessary to the faith. but ordinary usage, which determines what is correct in language, has determined that heresy relates to errors in faith and schism to errors in worship or discipline; so i am following that distinction.

schism, then, for the same reasons that have already been alleged, is nothing else but a separation made in the communion of the church upon account of something in divine worship or ecclesiastical discipline that is not any necessary part of it. now, nothing in worship or discipline can be necessary to christian communion but what christ our legislator, or the apostles by inspiration of the holy spirit, have commanded in express words.
schism, then is a split made in the communion of a church because of something in divine worship or ecclesiastical discipline that is not a necessary part of the faith. nothing in worship or church discipline can be necessary to christian communion apart from what was commanded, in so many words, by christ our legislator or by the apostles speaking under the inspiration of the holy spirit.

in a word, he that denies not anything that the holy scriptures teach in express words, nor makes a separation upon occasion of anything that is not manifestly contained in the sacred text - however he may be nicknamed by any sect of christians and declared by some or all of them to be utterly void of true christianity - yet in deed and in truth this man cannot be either a heretic or schismatic.
what i say is this: someone who doesn't deny anything that the holy scriptures teach explicitly, and doesn't create a split because of something that isn't clearly contained in the sacred text whatever label any sect of christians slap on him, and however many of them say that there's nothing christian about him cannot be either a heretic or a schismatic.

chapter i.
chapter 1: introduction

the subject of this essay is not the so-called liberty of the will, so unfortunately opposed to the misnamed doctrine of philosophical necessity; but civil, or social liberty: the nature and limits of the power which can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual. a question seldom stated, and hardly ever discussed, in general terms, but which profoundly influences the practical controversies of the age by its latent presence, and is likely soon to make itself recognised as the vital question of the future. it is so far from being new, that in a certain sense, it has divided mankind, almost from the remotest ages; but in the stage of progress into which the more civilised portions of the species have now entered, it presents itself under new conditions, and requires a different and more fundamental treatment.
the subject of this essay is not the so-called liberty of the will that is unfortunately opposed to the misnamed doctrine of philosophical necessity; i.e. i shan't be writing about anything like the issue between free-will and determinism. my topic is civil or social liberty the nature and limits of the power that society can legitimately exercise over the individual. this question is seldom posed, and almost never discussed, in general terms. yet it lurks behind many of the practical controversies of our day, profoundly influencing them, and is likely soon to make itself recognized as the vital question of the future. this isn't a new issue; indeed, it has in a certain sense divided mankind almost from the remotest ages; but in the stage of progress into which the more civilized parts of humanity have now entered, it comes up under new conditions and needs a different and more fundamental treatment.

the struggle between liberty and authority is the most conspicuous feature in the portions of history with which we are earliest familiar, particularly in that of greece, rome, and england. but in old times this contest was between subjects, or some classes of subjects, and the government. by liberty, was meant protection against the tyranny of the political rulers. the rulers were conceived (except in some of the popular governments of greece) as in a necessarily antagonistic position to the people whom they ruled. they consisted of a governing one, or a governing tribe or caste, who derived their authority from inheritance or conquest, who, at all events, did not hold it at the pleasure of the governed, and whose supremacy men did not venture, perhaps did not desire, to contest, whatever precautions might be taken against its oppressive exercise. their power was regarded as necessary, but also as highly dangerous; as a weapon which they would attempt to use against their subjects, no less than against external enemies. to prevent the weaker members of the community from being preyed upon by innumerable vultures, it was needful that there should be an animal of prey stronger than the rest, commissioned to keep them down. but as the king of the vultures would be no less bent upon preying on the flock than any of the minor harpies, it was indispensable to be in a perpetual attitude of defence against his beak and claws. the aim, therefore, of patriots, was to set limits to the power which the ruler should be suffered to exercise over the community; and this limitation was what they meant by liberty. it was attempted in two ways. first, by obtaining a recognition of certain immunities, called political liberties or rights, which it was to be regarded as a breach of duty in the ruler to infringe, and which if he did infringe, specific resistance, or general rebellion, was held to be justifiable. a second, and generally a later expedient, was the establishment of constitutional checks; by which the consent of the community, or of a body of some sort, supposed to represent its interests, was made a necessary condition to some of the more important acts of the governing power. to the first of these modes of limitation, the ruling power, in most european countries, was compelled, more or less, to submit. it was not so with the second; and to attain this, or when already in some degree possessed, to attain it more completely, became everywhere the principal object of the lovers of liberty. and so long as mankind were content to combat one enemy by another, and to be ruled by a master, on condition of being guaranteed more or less efficaciously against his tyranny, they did not carry their aspirations beyond this point.
the struggle between liberty and authority is the most conspicuous feature of the parts of history of which we have the oldest records, particularly in the histories of greece, rome, and england. but in olden times this contest was between subjects (or some classes of them) and the government. by liberty was meant protection against the tyranny of the political rulers. except in some of the democratic governments of greece, the rulers were seen as inevitably being antagonists of the people whom they ruled. the rulers consisted of a single governing person or a governing tribe or caste who derived their authority from inheritance or conquest, or at any rate didn't have it through the consent of the governed, and whose supremacy men didn't risk challenging (and perhaps didn't want to challenge), whatever precautions might be taken against its being used oppressively. their power was regarded as necessary, but also as highly dangerous because it was a weapon that they would try to use against their subjects as much as against external enemies. to prevent the weaker members of the community from being preyed on by innumerable vultures, there needed to be a predator stronger than the rest, whose job was to keep the vultures down. but as the king of the vultures would be just as intent on preying on the flock as would any of the minor predators, the subjects had to be in a perpetual attitude of defence against his beak and claws. so the aim of patriots was to set limits to the power that the ruler should be allowed to have over the community; and this limitation was what they meant by liberty. they tried to get it in two ways. first, by getting certain political liberties or rights to be recognized; if the ruler were to infringe these, that would be regarded as a breach of duty, and specific resistance or general rebellion would be regarded as justifiable. a second procedure generally a later one was to establish constitutional checks according to which some of the governing power's more important acts required the consent of the community or of a body of some sort supposed to represent the community's interests. in most european countries the ruling power was compelled, more or less, to submit to the first of these kinds of limitation. not so with the second; and the principal objective of the lovers of liberty everywhere came to be getting this constitutional limit on the rulers power or, when they already had it to some extent, achieving it more completely. and so long as mankind were content to fight off one enemy with help from another enemy, and to be ruled by a master on condition that they had a fairly effective guarantee against his tyranny, they didn't try for anything more than this.

a time, however, came, in the progress of human affairs, when men ceased to think it a necessity of nature that their governors should be an independent power, opposed in interest to themselves. it appeared to them much better that the various magistrates of the state should be their tenants or delegates, revocable at their pleasure. in that way alone, it seemed, could they have complete security that the powers of government would never be abused to their disadvantage. by degrees, this new demand for elective and temporary rulers became the prominent object of the exertions of the popular party, wherever any such party existed; and superseded, to a considerable extent, the previous efforts to limit the power of rulers. as the struggle proceeded for making the ruling power emanate from the periodical choice of the ruled, some persons began to think that too much importance had been attached to the limitation of the power itself. that (it might seem) was a resource against rulers whose interests were habitually opposed to those of the people. what was now wanted was, that the rulers should be identified with the people; that their interest and will should be the interest and will of the nation. the nation did not need to be protected against its own will. there was no fear of its tyrannising over itself. let the rulers be effectually responsible to it, promptly removable by it, and it could afford to trust them with power of which it could itself dictate the use to be made. their power was but the nation's own power, concentrated, and in a form convenient for exercise. this mode of thought, or rather perhaps of feeling, was common among the last generation of european liberalism, in the continental section of which it still apparently predominates. those who admit any limit to what a government may do, except in the case of such governments as they think ought not to exist, stand out as brilliant exceptions among the political thinkers of the continent. a similar tone of sentiment might by this time have been prevalent in our own country, if the circumstances which for a time encouraged it, had continued unaltered.
but a time came in the progress of human affairs when men stopped thinking it to be a necessity of nature that their governors should be an independent power with interests opposed to their own. it appeared to them much better that the various officers of the state should be their appointees, their delegates, who could be called back from office at the people's pleasure. only in that way, it seemed, could people be completely assured that the powers of government would never be misused to their disadvantage. this new demand to have rulers who were elected and temporary became the prominent aim of the democratic party, wherever any such party existed, and to a large extent it replaced the previous efforts to limit the power of rulers. as the struggle proceeded for making the ruling power come from the periodical choice of the ruled, some people started to think that too much importance had been attached to limiting the power itself. the thought was this: limitations on the power of government is something to be used against rulers whose interests are habitually opposed to those of the people. what we now want is for the rulers to be identified with the people, for their interests and decisions to be the interests and decisions of the nation. the nation doesn't need to be protected against its own will! there is no fear of its tyrannizing over itself. as long as the rulers are responsible to the nation and easily removable by it, it can afford to trust them with power. the rulers power is simply the nation's own power, concentrated and in a form convenient for use. this way of thinking, or perhaps rather of feeling, was common among the last generation of european liberalism, and apparently it still predominates in europe outside britain. those who admit any limit to what may be done by a government (setting aside governments that they think oughtn't to exist) stand out as brilliant exceptions among the political thinkers of continental europe. a similar attitude might by now have been prevalent in our own country, if the circumstances that for a time encouraged it hadn't changed.

but, in political and philosophical theories, as well as in persons, success discloses faults and infirmities which failure might have concealed from observation. the notion, that the people have no need to limit their power over themselves, might seem axiomatic, when popular government was a thing only dreamed about, or read of as having existed at some distant period of the past. neither was that notion necessarily disturbed by such temporary aberrations as those of the french revolution, the worst of which were the work of a usurping few, and which, in any case, belonged, not to the permanent working of popular institutions, but to a sudden and convulsive outbreak against monarchical and aristocratic despotism. in time, however, a democratic republic came to occupy a large portion of the earth's surface, and made itself felt as one of the most powerful members of the community of nations; and elective and responsible government became subject to the observations and criticisms which wait upon a great existing fact. it was now perceived that such phrases as self-government, and the power of the people over themselves, do not express the true state of the case. the people who exercise the power are not always the same people with those over whom it is exercised; and the self-government spoken of is not the government of each by himself, but of each by all the rest. the will of the people, moreover, practically means, the will of the most numerous or the most active part of the people; the majority, or those who succeed in making themselves accepted as the majority: the people, consequently, may desire to oppress a part of their number; and precautions are as much needed against this, as against any other abuse of power. the limitation, therefore, of the power of government over individuals, loses none of its importance when the holders of power are regularly accountable to the community, that is, to the strongest party therein. this view of things, recommending itself equally to the intelligence of thinkers and to the inclination of those important classes in european society to whose real or supposed interests democracy is adverse, has had no difficulty in establishing itself; and in political speculations the tyranny of the majority is now generally included among the evils against which society requires to be on its guard.
but in political and philosophical theories, as well as in persons, success reveals faults and weaknesses that failure might have hidden from view. the notion that the people needn't limit their power over themselves might seem axiomatic at a time when democratic government was only dreamed of, or read about as having existed in the distant past. and that notion wasn't inevitably disturbed by such temporary aberrations as those of the french revolution, the worst of which were the work of a few usurpers people who grabbed power without being entitled to it and which in any case didn't come from the permanent working of institutions among the people but from a sudden explosion against monarchical and aristocratic despotism. in time, however, a democratic republic came to occupy a large part of the earth's surface, and made itself felt as one of the most powerful members of the community of nations; and elected and responsible government became subject to the scrutiny and criticisms that any great existing fact is likely to draw on itself. it was now seen that such phrases as self-government, and the people's power over themselves don't express the true state of the case. the people who exercise the power aren't always the ones over whom it is exercised, and the self-government spoken of is the government not of each by himself but of each by all the rest. the will of the people in practice means the will of the most numerous or the most active part of the people; that is the majority, or those who get themselves to be accepted as the majority. so the people may desire to oppress some of their number; and precautions are as much needed against this as against any other abuse of power. thus, the limitation of government's power of over individuals loses none of its importance when the holders of power are regularly accountable to the community, i.e. to the strongest party in it. this view of things recommends itself equally to the intelligence of thinkers and to the desires of the important groups in european society to whose real or supposed interests democracy is adverse; so it has had no difficulty in establishing itself, and in political theorizing the tyranny of the majority is now generally included among the evils that society should guard against.

like other tyrannies, the tyranny of the majority was at first, and is still vulgarly, held in dread, chiefly as operating through the acts of the public authorities. but reflecting persons perceived that when society is itself the tyrant society collectively, over the separate individuals who compose it its means of tyrannising are not restricted to the acts which it may do by the hands of its political functionaries. society can and does execute its own mandates: and if it issues wrong mandates instead of right, or any mandates at all in things with which it ought not to meddle, it practises a social tyranny more formidable than many kinds of political oppression, since, though not usually upheld by such extreme penalties, it leaves fewer means of escape, penetrating much more deeply into the details of life, and enslaving the soul itself. protection, therefore, against the tyranny of the magistrate is not enough: there needs protection also against the tyranny of the prevailing opinion and feeling; against the tendency of society to impose, by other means than civil penalties, its own ideas and practices as rules of conduct on those who dissent from them; to fetter the development, and, if possible, prevent the formation, of any individuality not in harmony with its ways, and compel all characters to fashion themselves upon the model of its own. there is a limit to the legitimate interference of collective opinion with individual independence: and to find that limit, and maintain it against encroachment, is as indispensable to a good condition of human affairs, as protection against political despotism.
like other tyrannies, the tyranny of the majority was at first feared primarily as something that would operate through the acts of the public authorities, and this is how the man in the street still sees it. but thoughtful people saw that society itself can be the tyrant society collectively tyrannizing over individuals within it and that this kind of tyranny isn't restricted to what society can do through the acts of its political government. society can and does enforce its own commands; and if it issues wrong commands instead of right, or any commands on matters that it oughtn't to meddle with at all, it practises a social tyranny that is more formidable than many kinds of political oppression. although it isn't usually upheld by such extreme penalties, it leaves fewer means of escape, penetrating much more deeply into the details of life and enslaving the soul itself. so protection against the tyranny of government isn't enough; there needs to be protection also against the tyranny of prevailing opinion and feeling; against the tendency of society to turn its own ideas and practices into rules of conduct, and impose them by means other than legal penalties on those who dissent from them; to hamper the development and if possible to prevent the formation of any individuality that isn't in harmony with its ways. there is a limit to how far collective opinion can legitimately interfere with individual independence; and finding and defending that limit is as indispensable to a good condition of human affairs as is protection against political despotism.

but though this proposition is not likely to be contested in general terms, the practical question, where to place the limit how to make the fitting adjustment between individual independence and social control is a subject on which nearly everything remains to be done. all that makes existence valuable to any one, depends on the enforcement of restraints upon the actions of other people. some rules of conduct, therefore, must be imposed, by law in the first place, and by opinion on many things which are not fit subjects for the operation of law. what these rules should be, is the principal question in human affairs; but if we except a few of the most obvious cases, it is one of those which least progress has been made in resolving. no two ages, and scarcely any two countries, have decided it alike; and the decision of one age or country is a wonder to another. yet the people of any given age and country no more suspect any difficulty in it, than if it were a subject on which mankind had always been agreed. the rules which obtain among themselves appear to them self-evident and self-justifying. this all but universal illusion is one of the examples of the magical influence of custom, which is not only, as the proverb says, a second nature, but is continually mistaken for the first. the effect of custom, in preventing any misgiving respecting the rules of conduct which mankind impose on one another, is all the more complete because the subject is one on which it is not generally considered necessary that reasons should be given, either by one person to others, or by each to himself. people are accustomed to believe, and have been encouraged in the belief by some who aspire to the character of philosophers, that their feelings, on subjects of this nature, are better than reasons, and render reasons unnecessary. the practical principle which guides them to their opinions on the regulation of human conduct, is the feeling in each person's mind that everybody should be required to act as he, and those with whom he sympathises, would like them to act. no one, indeed, acknowledges to himself that his standard of judgment is his own liking; but an opinion on a point of conduct, not supported by reasons, can only count as one person's preference; and if the reasons, when given, are a mere appeal to a similar preference felt by other people, it is still only many people's liking instead of one. to an ordinary man, however, his own preference, thus supported, is not only a perfectly satisfactory reason, but the only one he generally has for any of his notions of morality, taste, or propriety, which are not expressly written in his religious creed; and his chief guide in the interpretation even of that. men's opinions, accordingly, on what is laudable or blamable, are affected by all the multifarious causes which influence their wishes in regard to the conduct of others, and which are as numerous as those which determine their wishes on any other subject. sometimes their reason at other times their prejudices or superstitions: often their social affections, not seldom their anti-social ones, their envy or jealousy, their arrogance or contemptuousness: but most commonly, their desires or fears for themselves their legitimate or illegitimate self-interest. wherever there is an ascendant class, a large portion of the morality of the country emanates from its class interests, and its feelings of class superiority. the morality between spartans and helots, between planters and negroes, between princes and subjects, between nobles and roturiers, between men and women, has been for the most part the creation of these class interests and feelings: and the sentiments thus generated, react in turn upon the moral feelings of the members of the ascendant class, in their relations among themselves. where, on the other hand, a class, formerly ascendant, has lost its ascendancy, or where its ascendancy is unpopular, the prevailing moral sentiments frequently bear the impress of an impatient dislike of superiority. another grand determining principle of the rules of conduct, both in act and forbearance, which have been enforced by law or opinion, has been the servility of mankind towards the supposed preferences or aversions of their temporal masters, or of their gods. this servility, though essentially selfish, is not hypocrisy; it gives rise to perfectly genuine sentiments of abhorrence; it made men burn magicians and heretics. among so many baser influences, the general and obvious interests of society have of course had a share, and a large one, in the direction of the moral sentiments: less, however, as a matter of reason, and on their own account, than as a consequence of the sympathies and antipathies which grew out of them: and sympathies and antipathies which had little or nothing to do with the interests of society, have made themselves felt in the establishment of moralities with quite as great force.
but though this proposition isn't likely to be disputed in general terms, the practical question of where to place the limit how to make the right adjustment between individual independence and social control is a subject on which nearly all the work remains to be done. everything that makes life worth living for anyone depends on restraints being put on the actions of other people. so some rules of conduct must be imposed in the first place by law, and secondarily by public opinion on many things that aren't fit subjects for law to work on. what should these rules be? that is the principal question in human affairs; but with a few obvious exceptions it is one of the questions that least progress has been made in resolving. it hasn't been answered in the same way in any two historical periods, and hardly ever in two countries in the same period; and the answer of one period or country is a source of amazement to another. yet the people in any given country at any given time don't see any problem here; it's as though they believed that mankind had always been agreed on what the rules should be. the rules that hold in their society appear to them to be self-evident and self-justifying. this almost universal illusion is one example of the magical influence of custom. the effect of custom in preventing any doubts concerning the rules of conduct that mankind impose on one another is made all the more complete by the fact that this isn't something that is generally considered to call for reasons whether to be given by one person to others or by a person to himself. people are accustomed to believe that on topics like this their feelings are better than reasons, and make it unnecessary to have reasons. (and some who like to think of themselves as philosophers have encouraged them in this.) the practical principle that leads them to their opinions on how human beings should behave is the feeling in each person's mind that everybody should be required to act as he, and those who feel as he does, would like them to act. of course no-one admits to himself that his standard of judgment is what he likes; but when an opinion on how people should behave isn't supported by reasons, it can count only as one person's preference; and if reasons are given, and turn out to be a mere appeal to a similar preference felt by other people, it is still only many people's liking instead of one person's. to an ordinary man, however, his own preference (with other people sharing it) is not only a perfectly satisfactory reason but is the only reason he has for most of his notions of morality, taste, or propriety except for notions that are explicitly written in his religious creed, and even that is something he interprets mainly in the light of his personal preferences. so men's opinions about what is praiseworthy or blamable are affected by all the various causes that influence their wishes concerning the conduct of others, and these causes are as numerous as those that influence their wishes on any other subject. it may be any of these: their reason, their prejudices or superstitions, their social feelings, their antisocial feelings envy or jealousy, arrogance or contempt, their desires or fears for themselves their legitimate or illegitimate self-interest.

the likings and dislikings of society, or of some powerful portion of it, are thus the main thing which has practically determined the rules laid down for general observance, under the penalties of law or opinion. and in general, those who have been in advance of society in thought and feeling have left this condition of things unassailed in principle, however they may have come into conflict with it in some of its details. they have occupied themselves rather in inquiring what things society ought to like or dislike, than in questioning whether its likings or dislikings should be a law to individuals. they preferred endeavouring to alter the feelings of mankind on the particular points on which they were themselves heretical, rather than make common cause in defence of freedom, with heretics generally. the only case in which the higher ground has been taken on principle and maintained with consistency, by any but an individual here and there, is that of religious belief: a case instructive in many ways, and not least so as forming a most striking instance of the fallibility of what is called the moral sense: for the odium theologicum, in a sincere bigot, is one of the most unequivocal cases of moral feeling. those who first broke the yoke of what called itself the universal church, were in general as little willing to permit difference of religious opinion as that church itself. but when the heat of the conflict was over, without giving a complete victory to any party, and each church or sect was reduced to limit its hopes to retaining possession of the ground it already occupied; minorities, seeing that they had no chance of becoming majorities, were under the necessity of pleading to those whom they could not convert, for permission to differ. it is accordingly on this battle-field, almost solely, that the rights of the individual against society have been asserted on broad grounds of principle, and the claim of society to exercise authority over dissentients, openly controverted. the great writers to whom the world owes what religious liberty it possesses, have mostly asserted freedom of conscience as an indefeasible right, and denied absolutely that a human being is accountable to others for his religious belief. yet so natural to mankind is intolerance in whatever they really care about, that religious freedom has hardly anywhere been practically realised, except where religious indifference, which dislikes to have its peace disturbed by theological quarrels, has added its weight to the scale. in the minds of almost all religious persons, even in the most tolerant countries, the duty of toleration is admitted with tacit reserves. one person will bear with dissent in matters of church government, but not of dogma; another can tolerate everybody, short of a papist or a unitarian; another, every one who believes in revealed religion; a few extend their charity a little further, but stop at the belief in a god and in a future state. wherever the sentiment of the majority is still genuine and intense, it is found to have abated little of its claim to be obeyed.
the likes and dislikes of society, or of some powerful part of it, are thus the main thing that has in practice determined the rules that societies have laid down for general observance under the penalties of law or opinion. and those who have been ahead of society in thought and feeling have generally not attacked this state of things in principle, however much they may have clashed with some of its details. they have been busier inquiring into what things society ought to like or dislike than in questioning whether society's likes or dislikes should be a law for individuals. they have tried to alter the feelings of mankind on the particular points on which they were themselves heretical i.e. out of step with society rather than making common cause in defence of freedom with heretics generally. the only case in which the higher ground has been taken on principle and maintained with consistency by more than a few individuals is that of religious belief. and this is instructive in many ways, partly because it provides a most striking instance of the fallibility of what is called the moral sense. it really is the moral sense that is involved, for the religious hatred felt by a sincere bigot is one of the most unambiguous cases of moral feeling. those who first broke the yoke of what called itself the universal church were in general no more willing to permit difference of religious opinion than was that church itself. but when the heat of the conflict was over, without giving a complete victory to any party, and each church or sect saw that the most it could hope for was to keep possession of the ground it already occupied, minorities were compelled to plead to those whom they could not convert for permission to differ; they had to do this because they saw that they had no chance of becoming majorities. so it is on this battle-field, and hardly anywhere else, that the rights of the individual against society have been asserted on broad grounds of principle, with the claim of society to exercise authority over dissentients being openly challenged. the great writers to whom the world owes what religious liberty it possesses have mostly asserted freedom of conscience as a right that can't be taken away, and totally denied that a human being is accountable to others for his religious belief. yet so natural to mankind is intolerance in whatever they really care about that religious freedom has hardly anywhere existed in practice, except where religious indifference which dislikes having its peace disturbed by theological quarrels has added its weight to the scale on the side of tolerance. in the minds of almost all religious persons, even in the most tolerant countries, the duty of toleration is admitted with unspoken reservations: one person will put up with dissent in matters of church government, but not of dogma. another can tolerate anyone except a roman catholic or a unitarian. a third tolerates everyone who believes in revealed religion but not those whose religious beliefs are based on arguments and evidence rather than on revelation. a few extend their charity a little further, but won't tolerate those who don't believe in a god and in a future state. wherever the sentiment of the majority is still genuine and intense, it is found not to have weakened much its claim to be obeyed.

in england, from the peculiar circumstances of our political history, though the yoke of opinion is perhaps heavier, that of law is lighter, than in most other countries of europe; and there is considerable jealousy of direct interference, by the legislative or the executive power, with private conduct; not so much from any just regard for the independence of the individual, as from the still subsisting habit of looking on the government as representing an opposite interest to the public. the majority have not yet learnt to feel the power of the government their power, or its opinions their opinions. when they do so, individual liberty will probably be as much exposed to invasion from the government, as it already is from public opinion. but, as yet, there is a considerable amount of feeling ready to be called forth against any attempt of the law to control individuals in things in which they have not hitherto been accustomed to be controlled by it; and this with very little discrimination as to whether the matter is, or is not, within the legitimate sphere of legal control; insomuch that the feeling, highly salutary on the whole, is perhaps quite as often misplaced as well grounded in the particular instances of its application. there is, in fact, no recognised principle by which the propriety or impropriety of government interference is customarily tested. people decide according to their personal preferences. some, whenever they see any good to be done, or evil to be remedied, would willingly instigate the government to undertake the business; while others prefer to bear almost any amount of social evil, rather than add one to the departments of human interests amenable to governmental control. and men range themselves on one or the other side in any particular case, according to this general direction of their sentiments; or according to the degree of interest which they feel in the particular thing which it is proposed that the government should do, or according to the belief they entertain that the government would, or would not, do it in the manner they prefer; but very rarely on account of any opinion to which they consistently adhere, as to what things are fit to be done by a government. and it seems to me that in consequence of this absence of rule or principle, one side is at present as often wrong as the other; the interference of government is, with about equal frequency, improperly invoked and improperly condemned.
because of the peculiar circumstances of english political history, though the yoke of opinion here may be heavier than it is in most other countries of europe, our yoke of law is lighter . here there is considerable resentment of direct interference with private conduct by the legislative or the executive power; though this comes not so much from any proper respect for the independence of the individual as from the lingering habit of seeing the government as representing an opposite interest to that of the public. the majority haven't yet learned to feel the power of the government as being their power, or its opinions as being their opinions. when they do so, individual liberty will probably be as vulnerable to invasion from the government as it already is from public opinion. but up to now there has been a considerable amount of feeling ready to be brought into action against any attempt by the law to control individuals in respects in which they haven't been controlled by it in the past. this happens with very little careful thought about whether or not the matter is within the legitimate sphere of legal control; so that the feeling against government interference, highly beneficial as it is on the whole, may be quite as often misplaced as well grounded in the particular instances of its application. there is, in fact, no recognized principle that is generally used to decide whether a given item of government interference is proper. people decide in individual cases according to their personal preferences. some, whenever they see any good to be done or evil to be remedied, are willing for the government to do something about it, while others would rather put up with almost any amount of social evil than add one to the areas of human life that are subject to governmental control. and men align themselves on one side or the other in any particular case according to this general direction (for or against governmental control) of their sentiments, or to how much they feel their own interests to be involved in the matter in question, or to whether they think that the government would settle the matter in the way they prefer; but very rarely on the basis of any firm, considered opinion concerning what things are fit to be done by a government. and it seems to me that because of this absence of rule or principle, one side is wrong as often as the other; the interference of government is with about equal frequency improperly supported and improperly condemned.

the object of this essay is to assert one very simple principle, as entitled to govern absolutely the dealings of society with the individual in the way of compulsion and control, whether the means used be physical force in the form of legal penalties, or the moral coercion of public opinion. that principle is, that the sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection. that the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others. his own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufficient warrant. he cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because it will be better for him to do so, because it will make him happier, because, in the opinions of others, to do so would be wise, or even right. these are good reasons for remonstrating with him, or reasoning with him, or persuading him, or entreating him, but not for compelling him, or visiting him with any evil in case he do otherwise. to justify that, the conduct from which it is desired to deter him must be calculated to produce evil to some one else. the only part of the conduct of any one, for which he is amenable to society, is that which concerns others. in the part which merely concerns himself, his independence is, of right, absolute. over himself, over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign.
the object of this essay is to assert one very simple principle and to argue that it should absolutely govern how society deals with its individual members in matters involving compulsion and control, whether through physical force in the form of legal penalties or through the moral coercion of public opinion. the principle is this: the only end for which people are entitled, individually or collectively, to interfere with the liberty of action of any of their number is self-protection. the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others. the person's own good, whether physical or moral, isn't a sufficient ground for interference with his conduct. he cannot rightfully be compelled to do (not do) something because doing it (not doing it) would be better for him, would make him happier, would be wise (in the opinions of others), or would be right. these are good reasons for protesting to him, reasoning with him, persuading him, or begging him, but not for compelling him or giving him a hard time if he acts otherwise. to justify that i.e. to justify compulsion or punishment the conduct from which it is desired to deter him must be likely to bring harm to someone else. the only part of anyone's conduct for which he is answerable to society is the part that concerns others. in the part that concerns himself alone he is entitled to absolute independence. over himself, over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign.

it is, perhaps, hardly necessary to say that this doctrine is meant to apply only to human beings in the maturity of their faculties. we are not speaking of children, or of young persons below the age which the law may fix as that of manhood or womanhood. those who are still in a state to require being taken care of by others, must be protected against their own actions as well as against external injury. for the same reason, we may leave out of consideration those backward states of society in which the race itself may be considered as in its nonage. the early difficulties in the way of spontaneous progress are so great, that there is seldom any choice of means for overcoming them; and a ruler full of the spirit of improvement is warranted in the use of any expedients that will attain an end, perhaps otherwise unattainable. despotism is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with barbarians, provided the end be their improvement, and the means justified by actually effecting that end. liberty, as a principle, has no application to any state of things anterior to the time when mankind have become capable of being improved by free and equal discussion. until then, there is nothing for them but implicit obedience to an akbar or a charlemagne, if they are so fortunate as to find one. but as soon as mankind have attained the capacity of being guided to their own improvement by conviction or persuasion (a period long since reached in all nations with whom we need here concern ourselves), compulsion, either in the direct form or in that of pains and penalties for non-compliance, is no longer admissible as a means to their own good, and justifiable only for the security of others.
i hardly need say that this doctrine is meant to apply only to human beings when they have reached the age of maturity. we aren't speaking of children, or of young persons below the age that the law fixes as that of manhood or womanhood. those who still need to be taken care of by others must be protected against their own actions as well as against external injury. for the same reason, we may leave out of consideration those backward states of society in which the race itself may be considered as not yet adult. the early difficulties in the way of spontaneous progress are so great that there is seldom any choice of means for overcoming them; and a ruler full of the spirit of improvement may legitimately use any means that will attain an end that perhaps can't be reached otherwise. despotism is a legitimate form of government in dealing with barbarians, provided that it aims at improving things and it uses means that actually do bring improvement. liberty, as a principle, doesn't apply to any state of affairs before mankind have become capable of being improved by free and equal discussion. until then, there is nothing for them but implicit obedience to an akbar or a charlemagne, if they are so fortunate as to find one i.e. to find a despot so wise. but in all the nations with which we need to concern ourselves here, the people long ago became able to be guided to self-improvement by conviction or persuasion; and once that stage has been reached, compulsion whether direct physical compulsion or compulsion through penalties for non-compliance is no longer admissible as a means to their own good, and is justifiable only for the security of others.

it is proper to state that i forego any advantage which could be derived to my argument from the idea of abstract right, as a thing independent of utility. i regard utility as the ultimate appeal on all ethical questions; but it must be utility in the largest sense, grounded on the permanent interests of man as a progressive being. those interests, i contend, authorise the subjection of individual spontaneity to external control, only in respect to those actions of each, which concern the interest of other people. if any one does an act hurtful to others, there is a prima facie case for punishing him, by law, or, where legal penalties are not safely applicable, by general disapprobation. there are also many positive acts for the benefit of others, which he may rightfully be compelled to perform; such as, to give evidence in a court of justice; to bear his fair share in the common defence, or in any other joint work necessary to the interest of the society of which he enjoys the protection; and to perform certain acts of individual beneficence, such as saving a fellow-creature's life, or interposing to protect the defenceless against ill-usage, things which whenever it is obviously a man's duty to do, he may rightfully be made responsible to society for not doing. a person may cause evil to others not only by his actions but by his inaction, and in either case he is justly accountable to them for the injury. the latter case, it is true, requires a much more cautious exercise of compulsion than the former. to make any one answerable for doing evil to others, is the rule; to make him answerable for not preventing evil, is, comparatively speaking, the exception. yet there are many cases clear enough and grave enough to justify that exception. in all things which regard the external relations of the individual, he is de jure amenable to those whose interests are concerned, and if need be, to society as their protector. there are often good reasons for not holding him to the responsibility; but these reasons must arise from the special expediencies of the case: either because it is a kind of case in which he is on the whole likely to act better, when left to his own discretion, than when controlled in any way in which society have it in their power to control him; or because the attempt to exercise control would produce other evils, greater than those which it would prevent. when such reasons as these preclude the enforcement of responsibility, the conscience of the agent himself should step into the vacant judgment seat, and protect those interests of others which have no external protection; judging himself all the more rigidly, because the case does not admit of his being made accountable to the judgment of his fellow-creatures.
but i don't argue in that way, because i hold that the ultimate appeal on all ethical questions is to utility i.e. to what the consequences are. however, it must be utility in the broadest sense, based on the permanent interests of man as a progressive being. those interests, i contend, make it all right to subject individual spontaneity to external control only in respect to those actions of each individual that concern the interests of other people. if anyone does something harmful to others, there is a prima facie case for punishing him either by law or, where legal penalties are not safely applicable, by general disapproval. there are also many positive acts for the benefit of others that an individual may rightfully be compelled to perform: to give evidence in a court of justice, to do his fair share in the defence of his country, or any other joint work necessary to the interests of the society whose protection he enjoys; the latter case, it is true, requires a much more cautious exercise of compulsion than the former. to make someone answerable for doing harm to others is the rule; to make him answerable for not preventing harm is, comparatively speaking, the exception. yet there are many cases clear enough and serious enough to justify that exception. in everything concerning the external relations of the individual, he is legally answerable to those whose interests are concerned, and if necessary to society as their protector. there are often good reasons for not holding him to that responsibility; but these reasons must arise from special features of the case: either it is a kind of case where he is likely to act better when left to himself than when controlled in any way that society could control him; or the attempt to exercise control would have bad effects greater than those that it would prevent. when such reasons as these rule out the enforcement of responsibility, the person's own conscience should move into the vacant judgment-seat and protect those interests of others that have no external protection; judging himself all the more severely because the case doesn't admit of his being made accountable to the judgment of his fellow-creatures.

but there is a sphere of action in which society, as distinguished from the individual, has, if any, only an indirect interest; comprehending all that portion of a person's life and conduct which affects only himself, or if it also affects others, only with their free, voluntary, and undeceived consent and participation. when i say only himself, i mean directly, and in the first instance: for whatever affects himself, may affect others through himself; and the objection which may be grounded on this contingency, will receive consideration in the sequel. this, then, is the appropriate region of human liberty. it comprises, first, the inward domain of consciousness; demanding liberty of conscience, in the most comprehensive sense; liberty of thought and feeling; absolute freedom of opinion and sentiment on all subjects, practical or speculative, scientific, moral, or theological. the liberty of expressing and publishing opinions may seem to fall under a different principle, since it belongs to that part of the conduct of an individual which concerns other people; but, being almost of as much importance as the liberty of thought itself, and resting in great part on the same reasons, is practically inseparable from it. secondly, the principle requires liberty of tastes and pursuits; of framing the plan of our life to suit our own character; of doing as we like, subject to such consequences as may follow: without impediment from our fellow-creatures, so long as what we do does not harm them, even though they should think our conduct foolish, perverse, or wrong. thirdly, from this liberty of each individual, follows the liberty, within the same limits, of combination among individuals; freedom to unite, for any purpose not involving harm to others: the persons combining being supposed to be of full age, and not forced or deceived.
but there is a sphere of action in which the interests of society, as distinct from those of the individual, are involved only indirectly if they are involved at all: it is the sphere containing all the part of the individual's life and conduct that affects only himself, or affects others but only with their free, voluntary, and undeceived consent and participation. when i say affects only himself i am talking about the direct and immediate effects of his conduct. this has to be stipulated, for whatever affects himself may affect others through himself. (conduct may be objected to on that ground; i'll consider this later.) so this is the appropriate region of human liberty. i map it as containing three provinces. (1) the inward domain of consciousness, demanding liberty of conscience in the broadest sense, liberty of thought and feeling, absolute freedom of opinion and sentiment on all subjects, practical or theoretical, scientific, moral, or theological, and liberty of expressing and publishing opinions. this last may seem to belong under a different principle, since it involves conduct of an individual that affects other people; but it can't in practice be separated from the liberty of thought it is almost as important as the latter and rests in great part on the same reasons. (2) liberty of tastes and pursuits, of shaping our life to suit our own character, of doing what we like. all this without hindrance from our fellow-creatures, so long as what we do doesn't harm them even though they may think our conduct foolish, perverse, or wrong. (3) following from the first two domains of liberty, there is the liberty, within the same limits, of individuals to come together, their freedom to unite for any purpose not involving harm to others always supposing that the people in question are of full age and aren't being forced or deceived.

no society in which these liberties are not, on the whole, respected, is free, whatever may be its form of government; and none is completely free in which they do not exist absolute and unqualified. the only freedom which deserves the name, is that of pursuing our own good in our own way, so long as we do not attempt to deprive others of theirs, or impede their efforts to obtain it. each is the proper guardian of his own health, whether bodily, or mental and spiritual. mankind are greater gainers by suffering each other to live as seems good to themselves, than by compelling each to live as seems good to the rest.
no society in which these liberties are not mainly respected is free, whatever form of government it has; and none is completely free in which they don't exist absolute and unqualified. the only freedom that deserves the name is the freedom to pursue our own good in our own way, so long as we don't try to deprive others of their good or hinder their efforts to obtain it. each is the proper guardian of his own health of body, mind, and spirit. mankind gain more from allowing each other to live in the way that seems good to themselves than they would from compelling each to live in the way that seems good to the rest.

though this doctrine is anything but new, and, to some persons, may have the air of a truism, there is no doctrine which stands more directly opposed to the general tendency of existing opinion and practice. society has expended fully as much effort in the attempt (according to its lights) to compel people to conform to its notions of personal, as of social excellence. the ancient commonwealths thought themselves entitled to practise, and the ancient philosophers countenanced, the regulation of every part of private conduct by public authority, on the ground that the state had a deep interest in the whole bodily and mental discipline of every one of its citizens; a mode of thinking which may have been admissible in small republics surrounded by powerful enemies, in constant peril of being subverted by foreign attack or internal commotion, and to which even a short interval of relaxed energy and self-command might so easily be fatal, that they could not afford to wait for the salutary permanent effects of freedom. in the modern world, the greater size of political communities, and above all, the separation between spiritual and temporal authority (which placed the direction of men's consciences in other hands than those which controlled their worldly affairs), prevented so great an interference by law in the details of private life; but the engines of moral repression have been wielded more strenuously against divergence from the reigning opinion in self-regarding, than even in social matters; religion, the most powerful of the elements which have entered into the formation of moral feeling, having almost always been governed either by the ambition of a hierarchy, seeking control over every department of human conduct, or by the spirit of puritanism. and some of those modern reformers who have placed themselves in strongest opposition to the religions of the past, have been noway behind either churches or sects in their assertion of the right of spiritual domination: m. comte, in particular, whose social system, as unfolded in his traite de politique positive, aims at establishing (though by moral more than by legal appliances) a despotism of society over the individual, surpassing anything contemplated in the political ideal of the most rigid disciplinarian among the ancient philosophers.
this doctrine is far from new, and it may strike some as a mere truism; but in fact there is no doctrine that stands more directly opposed to the general tendency of existing opinion and practice! society has put as much effort into trying (according to its lights) to compel people to conform to its notions of personal excellence as into trying to compel them to conform to its notions of social excellence. the ancient commonwealths thought (and the ancient philosophers agreed) that every part of private conduct could rightly be regulated by public authority, on the ground that the state's welfare involved the whole bodily and mental discipline of every one of its citizens. this way of thinking may have been admissible in small republics surrounded by powerful enemies, in constant peril of being pulled down by foreign attack or internal upheavals, so that even a short period of relaxation and leaving the people to themselves might easily be fatal so easily that they couldn't afford to wait for the beneficial permanent effects of freedom. in the modern world two factors have prevented the law from interfering so greatly in the details of private life: the greater size of political communities, and above all the separation between the spiritual and temporal authority, i.e. between church and state, which placed the direction of men's consciences in other hands than those that controlled their worldly affairs. but the engines of moral as distinct from political repression that have been wielded against divergence from the prevailing opinion and attitudes have put less energy into this with regard to social matters than with regard to personal, private, self-regarding conduct. a reason for this is that religion, which is the most powerful of the elements that have contributed to forming moral feeling, has almost always been governed either by the ambition of a hierarchy, seeking control over every department of human conduct, or by the spirit of puritanism. but that isn't the whole story, for some of the modern reformers who have placed themselves in strongest opposition to the religions of the past have been right up there with the churches and sects in their assertion of the right to spiritual domination. a prime example is m. comte, whose social system as set out in his systeme de politique positive aims at establishing (though by moral more than by legal pressures) a despotism of society over the individual that surpasses anything contemplated in the political ideal of the most rigid disciplinarian among the ancient philosophers!

apart from the peculiar tenets of individual thinkers, there is also in the world at large an increasing inclination to stretch unduly the powers of society over the individual, both by the force of opinion and even by that of legislation: and as the tendency of all the changes taking place in the world is to strengthen society, and diminish the power of the individual, this encroachment is not one of the evils which tend spontaneously to disappear, but, on the contrary, to grow more and more formidable. the disposition of mankind, whether as rulers or as fellow-citizens to impose their own opinions and inclinations as a rule of conduct on others, is so energetically supported by some of the best and by some of the worst feelings incident to human nature, that it is hardly ever kept under restraint by anything but want of power; and as the power is not declining, but growing, unless a strong barrier of moral conviction can be raised against the mischief, we must expect, in the present circumstances of the world, to see it increase.
apart from the special views of individual thinkers, there is also in the world at large an increasing inclination to stretch unduly the powers of society over the individual, both through the force of opinion and even through that of legislation; and because the tendency of all the changes taking place in the world is to strengthen society and lessen the power of the individual, this encroachment isn't one of the evils that tend spontaneously to disappear, but on the contrary is one of the evils that tend to grow more and more formidable. mankind have some disposition, whether as rulers or as fellow-citizens, to impose their own opinions and inclinations as a rule of conduct on others; this disposition is so energetically supported by some of the best and by some of the worst feelings in human nature that it is hardly ever kept under restraint by anything except lack of power; and the power of societies is not declining but growing; so unless a strong barrier of moral conviction can be raised against the mischief of unwarranted interference with individual liberty, we must expect given the way the world is to see it increase.

it will be convenient for the argument, if, instead of at once entering upon the general thesis, we confine ourselves in the first instance to a single branch of it, on which the principle here stated is, if not fully, yet to a certain point, recognised by the current opinions. this one branch is the liberty of thought: from which it is impossible to separate the cognate liberty of speaking and of writing. although these liberties, to some considerable amount, form part of the political morality of all countries which profess religious toleration and free institutions, the grounds, both philosophical and practical, on which they rest, are perhaps not so familiar to the general mind, nor so thoroughly appreciated by many even of the leaders of opinion, as might have been expected. those grounds, when rightly understood, are of much wider application than to only one division of the subject, and a thorough consideration of this part of the question will be found the best introduction to the remainder. those to whom nothing which i am about to say will be new, may therefore, i hope, excuse me, if on a subject which for now three centuries has been so often discussed, i venture on one discussion more.
it will be convenient for the argument, if instead of plunging immediately into the general thesis we confine ourselves at first to a single branch of it a branch on which the general principle here stated is to some extent recognized by current opinions. this one branch is the liberty of thought, from which it is impossible to separate the related understood, also apply to other divisions of our subject, and a thorough consideration of this part of the question will be found to be the best introduction to the remainder. so i hope you'll forgive me if nothing that i am about to say is new to you, as i embark on yet one more discussion of something that has often been discussed over the past three centuries.

chapter ii. of the liberty of thought and discussion.
chapter 2: liberty of thought and discussion

the time, it is to be hoped, is gone by, when any defence would be necessary of the liberty of the press as one of the securities against corrupt or tyrannical government. no argument, we may suppose, can now be needed, against permitting a legislature or an executive, not identified in interest with the people, to prescribe opinions to them, and determine what doctrines or what arguments they shall be allowed to hear. this aspect of the question, besides, has been so often and so triumphantly enforced by preceding writers, that it need not be specially insisted on in this place. though the law of england, on the subject of the press, is as servile to this day as it was in the time of the tudors, there is little danger of its being actually put in force against political discussion, except during some temporary panic, when fear of insurrection drives ministers and judges from their propriety; and, speaking generally, it is not, in constitutional countries, to be apprehended that the government, whether completely responsible to the people or not, will often attempt to control the expression of opinion, except when in doing so it makes itself the organ of the general intolerance of the public. let us suppose, therefore, that the government is entirely at one with the people, and never thinks of exerting any power of coercion unless in agreement with what it conceives to be their voice. but i deny the right of the people to exercise such coercion, either by themselves or by their government. the power itself is illegitimate. the best government has no more title to it than the worst. it is as noxious, or more noxious, when exerted in accordance with public opinion, than when in or opposition to it. if all mankind minus one, were of one opinion, and only one person were of the contrary opinion, mankind would be no more justified in silencing that one person, than he, if he had the power, would be justified in silencing mankind. were an opinion a personal possession of no value except to the owner; if to be obstructed in the enjoyment of it were simply a private injury, it would make some difference whether the injury was inflicted only on a few persons or on many. but the peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is, that it is robbing the human race; posterity as well as the existing generation; those who dissent from the opinion, still more than those who hold it. if the opinion is right, they are deprived of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth: if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a benefit, the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth, produced by its collision with error.
this aspect of the liberty issue has been so often and so triumphantly enforced by previous writers that there is no need for me to make a special point of it here. though the law of england regarding the press is as servile today as it was three hundred years ago, there is little danger of its being actually enforced against political discussion, except during some temporary panic when fear of revolt drives ministers and judges from their proper course. generally speaking, it isn't likely that the government in a constitutional country, whether or not it is completely answerable to the people, will often try to control the expression of opinion except when by doing so it expresses the general intolerance of the public. let us suppose, therefore, that the government is entirely in harmony with the people, and never thinks of coercing anyone except in ways that it thinks the people want. but i deny the right of the people to exercise such coercion, whether directly or through their government. the power of coercion itself is illegitimate. the best government has no more right to it than the worst. it is at least as noxious when exerted in accordance with public opinion as when it is exerted in opposition to it. if all mankind minus one were of one opinion, and that one had the contrary opinion, mankind would be no more justified in silencing that one person than he would be in silencing them if he could. you might think that silencing only one couldn't be so very wrong, but that is mistaken, and here is why. if an opinion were a personal possession of no value except to the person who has it, so that being obstructed in the enjoyment of it was simply a private injury, it would make some difference whether the harm was inflicted on only a few persons or on many. but the special wrongness of silencing the expression of an opinion is that it is robbing not one individual, but the human race, posterity as well as the present generation, those who dissent from the opinion as well as those who hold it.

it is necessary to consider separately these two hypotheses, each of which has a distinct branch of the argument corresponding to it. we can never be sure that the opinion we are endeavouring to stifle is a false opinion; and if we were sure, stifling it would be an evil still.
indeed, those who dissent are wronged more than those who agree. if the opinion in question is right, they are robbed of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth; and if it is wrong, they lose a benefit that is almost as great, namely the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth that would come from its collision with error. we need to consider these two cases separately; each has a distinct branch of the argument corresponding to it. we can never be sure that the opinion we are trying to suppress is false; and even if we were sure of its falsity it would still be wrong to suppress it.

first: the opinion which it is attempted to suppress by authority may possibly be true. those who desire to suppress it, of course deny its truth; but they are not infallible. they have no authority to decide the question for all mankind, and exclude every other person from the means of judging. to refuse a hearing to an opinion, because they are sure that it is false, is to assume that their certainty is the same thing as absolute certainty. all silencing of discussion is an assumption of infallibility. its condemnation may be allowed to rest on this common argument, not the worse for being common.
first: the opinion the authorities are trying to suppress may be true. those who want to suppress it will deny its truth, of course; but they aren't infallible. they have no authority to decide the question for all mankind, and exclude every other person from the means of judging. to refuse a hearing to an opinion because they are sure that it is false is to assume that their certainty is the same thing as absolute certainty i.e. that their being sure that p is the same as its being certainly true that p. all silencing of discussion is an assumption of infallibility, which is a good argument for condemning it; many people have used this argument, but it's none the worse for that.

unfortunately for the good sense of mankind, the fact of their fallibility is far from carrying the weight in their practical judgment, which is always allowed to it in theory; for while every one well knows himself to be fallible, few think it necessary to take any precautions against their own fallibility, or admit the supposition that any opinion, of which they feel very certain, may be one of the examples of the error to which they acknowledge themselves to be liable. absolute princes, or others who are accustomed to unlimited deference, usually feel this complete confidence in their own opinions on nearly all subjects. people more happily situated, who sometimes hear their opinions disputed, and are not wholly unused to be set right when they are wrong, place the same unbounded reliance only on such of their opinions as are shared by all who surround them, or to whom they habitually defer: for in proportion to a man's want of confidence in his own solitary judgment, does he usually repose, with implicit trust, on the infallibility of the world in general. and the world, to each individual, means the part of it with which he comes in contact; his party, his sect, his church, his class of society: the man may be called, by comparison, almost liberal and large-minded to whom it means anything so comprehensive as his own country or his own age. nor is his faith in this collective authority at all shaken by his being aware that other ages, countries, sects, churches, classes, and parties have thought, and even now think, the exact reverse. he devolves upon his own world the responsibility of being in the right against the dissentient worlds of other people; and it never troubles him that mere accident has decided which of these numerous worlds is the object of his reliance, and that the same causes which make him a churchman in london, would have made him a buddhist or a confucian in pekin. yet it is as evident in itself as any amount of argument can make it, that ages are no more infallible than individuals; every age having held many opinions which subsequent ages have deemed not only false but absurd; and it is as certain that many opinions, now general, will be rejected by future ages, as it is that many, once general, are rejected by the present.
unfortunately for the good sense of mankind, the fact that people are fallible doesn't carry nearly as much weight in practice as it is allowed to carry in theory. everyone knows perfectly well that he is fallible, but few think it necessary to take any precautions against their own fallibility, or allow that the errors to which they admit they are liable might include some opinion of which they feel very certain. absolute monarchs, or others accustomed to unlimited deference, usually feel this complete confidence in their own opinions on nearly all subjects. people who lack the disadvantages of monarchs and thus sometimes hear their opinions disputed, and have some experience of being set right when they are wrong, have the same unbounded confidence only in such of their opinions as are shared by all around them, or by those to whom they habitually defer. for the less confidence someone has in his own individual judgment, the more he relies, with complete trust, on the infallibility of the world in general. and the world, to each individual, means the part of it that he comes into contact with: his party, his sect, his church, his class of society. by comparison with most people, a man may be called almost liberal and large-minded if to him the world on which he bases his most confident opinions is anything as comprehensive as his own country or the times in which he lives. the faith he has in this collective authority isn't at all shaken by his being aware that other ages, countries, sects, churches, classes, and parties have thought and even now think the exact reverse of what he does. he bestows on his own world the responsibility for being in the right against the dissentient worlds of other people. it doesn't bother him that mere accident has decided which of these numerous worlds is the one he relies on: that the causes that make him an anglican in london would have made him a buddhist or a confucian in peking. yet it is as evident in itself as any amount of argument can make it that ages are no more infallible than individuals, because every age has held many opinions that subsequent ages deemed to be not only false but absurd; and it is as certain that many opinions now generally accepted will be rejected by future ages as it is that many that have been generally accepted are now rejected.

the objection likely to be made to this argument, would probably take some such form as the following. there is no greater assumption of infallibility in forbidding the propagation of error, than in any other thing which is done by public authority on its own judgment and responsibility. judgment is given to men that they may use it. because it may be used erroneously, are men to be told that they ought not to use it at all? to prohibit what they think pernicious, is not claiming exemption from error, but fulfilling the duty incumbent on them, although fallible, of acting on their conscientious conviction. if we were never to act on our opinions, because those opinions may be wrong, we should leave all our interests uncared for, and all our duties unperformed. an objection which applies to all conduct, can be no valid objection to any conduct in particular. it is the duty of governments, and of individuals, to form the truest opinions they can; to form them carefully, and never impose them upon others unless they are quite sure of being right. but when they are sure (such reasoners may say), it is not conscientiousness but cowardice to shrink from acting on their opinions, and allow doctrines which they honestly think dangerous to the welfare of mankind, either in this life or in another, to be scattered abroad without restraint, because other people, in less enlightened times, have persecuted opinions now believed to be true. let us take care, it may be said, not to make the same mistake: but governments and nations have made mistakes in other things, which are not denied to be fit subjects for the exercise of authority: they have laid on bad taxes, made unjust wars. ought we therefore to lay on no taxes, and, under whatever provocation, make no wars? men, and governments, must act to the best of their ability. there is no such thing as absolute certainty, but there is assurance sufficient for the purposes of human life. we may, and must, assume our opinion to be true for the guidance of our own conduct: and it is assuming no more when we forbid bad men to pervert society by the propagation of opinions which we regard as false and pernicious.
an objection that is likely to be made to this argument runs somewhat as follows: there is no greater assumption of infallibility in forbidding the propagation of error than there is in anything else done by public authority on its own judgment and responsibility. judgment is given to men to be used. because it may be used erroneously, are men to be told that they oughtn't to use it at all? to prohibit something they think to be pernicious is not to claim exemption from error, but to perform their duty to act, fallible though they are, on their conscientious convictions. if we were never to act on our opinions because they may be wrong, we would leave all our interests uncared for and all our duties unperformed. an objection that applies to all conduct can't be a valid objection to any conduct in particular. governments and individuals have a duty to form the truest opinions they can; to form them carefully, and never impose them on others unless they are quite sure of being right. but when they are sure, it is not conscientiousness but cowardice to shrink from acting on their opinions, and to allow doctrines that they honestly think dangerous to the welfare of mankind either in this life or in another to be scattered abroad without restraint, just because other people in less enlightened times have persecuted opinions that are now believed to be true! let us take care not to make the same mistake; but governments and nations have made mistakes in other things that are not denied to be fit subjects for the exercise of authority, such as imposing bad taxes and making unjust wars. ought we therefore to impose no taxes, and whatever the provocation to make no wars? men and governments must act to the best of their ability. there's no such thing as absolute certainty, but there is assurance sufficient for the purposes of human life. we may we must assume our opinion to be true for the guidance of our own conduct; and that's all we are assuming when we forbid bad men to pervert society by spreading opinions that we regard as false and pernicious.

i answer that it is assuming very much more. there is the greatest difference between presuming an opinion to be true, because, with every opportunity for contesting it, it has not been refuted, and assuming its truth for the purpose of not permitting its refutation. complete liberty of contradicting and disproving our opinion, is the very condition which justifies us in assuming its truth for purposes of action; and on no other terms can a being with human faculties have any rational assurance of being right.
i answer: no, it is assuming very much more than that. there is the greatest difference between presuming an opinion to be true because, with every opportunity for contesting it, it hasn't been refuted, and assuming its truth as a basis for not permitting its refutation. complete liberty of contradicting and disproving our opinion is the very condition that justifies us in assuming its truth for purposes of action; and on no other terms can a human being have any rational assurance of being right.

when we consider either the history of opinion, or the ordinary conduct of human life, to what is it to be ascribed that the one and the other are no worse than they are? not certainly to the inherent force of the human understanding; for, on any matter not self-evident, there are ninety-nine persons totally incapable of judging of it, for one who is capable; and the capacity of the hundredth person is only comparative; for the majority of the eminent men of every past generation held many opinions now known to be erroneous, and did or approved numerous things which no one will now justify. why is it, then, that there is on the whole a preponderance among mankind of rational opinions and rational conduct? if there really is this preponderance which there must be, unless human affairs are, and have always been, in an almost desperate state it is owing to a quality of the human mind, the source of everything respectable in man either as an intellectual or as a moral being, namely, that his errors are corrigible. he is capable of rectifying his mistakes, by discussion and experience. not by experience alone. there must be discussion, to show how experience is to be interpreted. wrong opinions and practices gradually yield to fact and argument: but facts and arguments, to produce any effect on the mind, must be brought before it. very few facts are able to tell their own story, without comments to bring out their meaning. the whole strength and value, then, of human judgment, depending on the one property, that it can be set right when it is wrong, reliance can be placed on it only when the means of setting it right are kept constantly at hand. in the case of any person whose judgment is really deserving of confidence, how has it become so? because he has kept his mind open to criticism of his opinions and conduct. because it has been his practice to listen to all that could be said against him; to profit by as much of it as was just, and expound to himself, and upon occasion to others, the fallacy of what was fallacious. because he has felt, that the only way in which a human being can make some approach to knowing the whole of a subject, is by hearing what can be said about it by persons of every variety of opinion, and studying all modes in which it can be looked at by every character of mind. no wise man ever acquired his wisdom in any mode but this; nor is it in the nature of human intellect to become wise in any other manner. the steady habit of correcting and completing his own opinion by collating it with those of others, so far from causing doubt and hesitation in carrying it into practice, is the only stable foundation for a just reliance on it: for, being cognisant of all that can, at least obviously, be said against him, and having taken up his position against all gainsayers knowing that he has sought for objections and difficulties, instead of avoiding them, and has shut out no light which can be thrown upon the subject from any quarter he has a right to think his judgment better than that of any person, or any multitude, who have not gone through a similar process.
look at the history of what people have believed; or look at the ordinary conduct of human life. why are each of these no worse than they are? it is certainly not because of the inherent force of the human understanding! take any proposition that isn't self-evident: for every person who is capable of judging it, there are ninety-nine others who aren't; and the capability of that one person is only comparative; for the majority of the eminent men of every past generation held many opinions now known to be erroneous, and did or approved many things that no-one would now defend. well, then, why is it that there is on the whole a preponderance among mankind of rational opinions and rational conduct? if there really is this preponderance and there must be, unless human affairs are and always were in an almost desperate state it is owing to the fact that the errors of the human mind can be corrected. this quality of the human mind is the source of everything worthy of respect in man, whether as a thinking or as a moral being. he is capable of correcting his mistakes by discussion and experience. not by experience alone: there must be discussion, to show how experience is to be interpreted. wrong opinions and practices gradually give way to fact and argument; but facts and arguments can't have any effect on the mind unless they are brought before it. very few facts are able to tell their own story, without comments to bring out their meaning. so: because the whole strength and value of human judgment depends on a single property, namely that it can be set right when it is wrong, it can be relied on only when the means of setting it right are kept constantly at hand. consider someone whose judgment really is deserving of confidence how has it become so? through his conducting himself as follows: he has kept his mind open to criticism of his opinions and conduct. he has made it his practice to listen to all that could be said against him, to profit by as much of it as was sound, and expound to himself and sometimes to others the fallacy of what was fallacious. he has felt that the only way for a human to approach knowing the whole of a subject is by hearing what can be said about it by persons of every variety of opinion, and studying all the ways in which it can be looked at by every kind of mind. no wise man ever acquired his wisdom in any way but this; and the human intellect isn't built to become wise in any other manner. the steady habit of correcting and completing his own opinion by comparing it with those of others, so far from causing doubt and hesitation in acting on the opinion, is the only stable foundation for a sound reliance on it. knowing everything that can, at least obviously, be said against him, and having taken up his position against those who disagree, knowing that he has looked for objections and difficulties instead of avoiding them, and has shut out no light that can be thrown on the subject from any direction he has a right to think his judgment better than that of any person or crowd of them that hasn't gone through a similar process.

it is not too much to require that what the wisest of mankind, those who are best entitled to trust their own judgment, find necessary to warrant their relying on it, should be submitted to by that miscellaneous collection of a few wise and many foolish individuals, called the public. the most intolerant of churches, the roman catholic church, even at the canonisation of a saint, admits, and listens patiently to, a devil's advocate. the holiest of men, it appears, cannot be admitted to posthumous honours, until all that the devil could say against him is known and weighed. if even the newtonian philosophy were not permitted to be questioned, mankind could not feel as complete assurance of its truth as they now do. the beliefs which we have most warrant for, have no safeguard to rest on, but a standing invitation to the whole world to prove them unfounded. if the challenge is not accepted, or is accepted and the attempt fails, we are far enough from certainty still; but we have done the best that the existing state of human reason admits of; we have neglected nothing that could give the truth a chance of reaching us: if the lists are kept open, we may hope that if there be a better truth, it will be found when the human mind is capable of receiving it; and in the meantime we may rely on having attained such approach to truth, as is possible in our own day. this is the amount of certainty attainable by a fallible being, and this the sole way of attaining it.
it is not too much to require that what the wisest of mankind, those who are best entitled to trust their own judgment, find necessary to warrant their relying on it, should be submitted to by that miscellaneous collection of a few wise and many foolish individuals called the public. the most intolerant of churches, the roman catholic church, even at the canonization of a saint, admits and patiently listens to a devil's advocate. the holiest of men, it seems, can't be admitted to posthumous honours until all that the devil could say against him is known and weighed. even newton's physics if we weren't permitted to question it, mankind couldn't feel as completely sure of its truth as they now do. the beliefs that we have most justification for have as their only safeguard a standing invitation to the whole world to try to prove them unfounded. if that challenge isn't accepted, or is accepted and the attempt fails, we are still far from certainty; but we have done the best that the existing state of human reason admits of; we have neglected nothing that could give the truth a chance of reaching us. if the challenge continues to stand, we can hope that if there is a better truth it will be found when the human mind is capable of receiving it; and in the meantime we may rely on having attained as close an approach to truth as is possible in our own day. that is how much certainty a fallible being can get, and that is the only way to get it.

strange it is, that men should admit the validity of the arguments for free discussion, but object to their being pushed to an extreme; not seeing that unless the reasons are good for an extreme case, they are not good for any case. strange that they should imagine that they are not assuming infallibility, when they acknowledge that there should be free discussion on all subjects which can possibly be doubtful, but think that some particular principle or doctrine should be forbidden to be questioned because it is so certain, that is, because they are certain that it is certain. to call any proposition certain, while there is any one who would deny its certainty if permitted, but who is not permitted, is to assume that we ourselves, and those who agree with us, are the judges of certainty, and judges without hearing the other side.
it's strange that men should admit the validity of the arguments for free discussion, but object to their being pushed to an extreme, not seeing that unless the reasons are good for an extreme case they aren't good for any case. strange that they should imagine that they aren't assuming infallibility when they acknowledge that there should be free discussion on all subjects that can possibly be doubtful, but think that some particular principle or doctrine this being the extreme case ought not to be questioned because it is so certain (meaning that it is certain because they are certain!). if we call any proposition certain while there is anyone who would deny its certainty if permitted (but who isn't permitted), we're assuming that we and those who agree with us are the judges of certainty judges who don't hear the other side.

in the present age which has been described as destitute of faith, but terrified at scepticism in which people feel sure, not so much that their opinions are true, as that they should not know what to do without them the claims of an opinion to be protected from public attack are rested not so much on its truth, as on its importance to society. there are, it is alleged, certain beliefs, so useful, not to say indispensable to well-being, that it is as much the duty of governments to uphold those beliefs, as to protect any other of the interests of society. in a case of such necessity, and so directly in the line of their duty, something less than infallibility may, it is maintained, warrant, and even bind, governments, to act on their own opinion, confirmed by the general opinion of mankind. it is also often argued, and still oftener thought, that none but bad men would desire to weaken these salutary beliefs; and there can be nothing wrong, it is thought, in restraining bad men, and prohibiting what only such men would wish to practise. this mode of thinking makes the justification of restraints on discussion not a question of the truth of doctrines, but of their usefulness; and flatters itself by that means to escape the responsibility of claiming to be an infallible judge of opinions. but those who thus satisfy themselves, do not perceive that the assumption of infallibility is merely shifted from one point to another. the usefulness of an opinion is itself matter of opinion: as disputable, as open to discussion, and requiring discussion as much, as the opinion itself. there is the same need of an infallible judge of opinions to decide an opinion to be noxious, as to decide it to be false, unless the opinion condemned has full opportunity of defending itself. and it will not do to say that the heretic may be allowed to maintain the utility or harmlessness of his opinion, though forbidden to maintain its truth. the truth of an opinion is part of its utility. if we would know whether or not it is desirable that a proposition should be believed, is it possible to exclude the consideration of whether or not it is true? in the opinion, not of bad men, but of the best men, no belief which is contrary to truth can be really useful: and can you prevent such men from urging that plea, when they are charged with culpability for denying some doctrine which they are told is useful, but which they believe to be false? those who are on the side of received opinions, never fail to take all possible advantage of this plea; you do not find them handling the question of utility as if it could be completely abstracted from that of truth: on the contrary, it is, above all, because their doctrine is the truth, that the knowledge or the belief of it is held to be so indispensable. there can be no fair discussion of the question of usefulness, when an argument so vital may be employed on one side, but not on the other. and in point of fact, when law or public feeling do not permit the truth of an opinion to be disputed, they are just as little tolerant of a denial of its usefulness. the utmost they allow is an extenuation of its absolute necessity, or of the positive guilt of rejecting it.
in the present age which has been described as destitute of faith, but terrified of scepticism people feel sure not so much that their opinions are true as that they wouldn't know what to do without them. so the claims of an opinion to be protected from public attack are based less on its truth than on its importance to society. this is alleged: some beliefs are so useful, indeed indispensable, to our well-being that governments have as much of a duty to uphold them as to protect any other of the interests of society. with that kind of necessity, on matters that are directly in the government's line of duty, something less than infallibility may permit and even oblige governments to act on their own opinion, confirmed by the general opinion of mankind. something else that is also often argued, and still oftener thought, is this: only bad men would want to weaken these beneficial beliefs; and there can't be anything wrong in restraining bad men, and in prohibiting something that only bad men would want to do. this way of thinking tries to justify restraints on discussion not through the truth of doctrines but through their usefulness; and it hopes in that way to avoid having to claim to be an infallible judge of opinions. but those who are content with this don't see that they have merely shifted the assumption of infallibility from one point to another. the usefulness of an opinion is itself a matter of opinion, and is as disputable as open to discussion and as much in need of it as is the opinion itself. deciding that an opinion is dangerous, just like deciding that it is false, requires an infallible judge of opinions unless the condemned opinion has a full opportunity to defend itself. well, the heretic may be allowed to maintain that his opinion is useful, or harmless, though he is forbidden to maintain its truth. that won't do, because the truth of an opinion is part of its usefulness. if we want to know whether it is desirable that a proposition be believed, can we possibly exclude the question of whether it is true? no belief that is contrary to truth can be really useful: this is the opinion not of bad men but of the best men. when a good man is accused of denying some doctrine that he is told is useful but which he believes is false, can he be prevented from urging that false doctrines can never be useful? those who are on the side of publicly accepted opinions never fail to take advantage of this plea; you don't find them handling the question of utility as if it could be completely sifted out from the question of truth; on the contrary, they hold that the doctrine they are protecting is indispensable precisely because it is the truth. there can be no fair discussion of usefulness if such a vital argument can be employed on one side of the debate but not on the other. and in practice when law or public feeling doesn't permit the truth of an opinion to be disputed, it is just as intolerant of a denial of its usefulness.

in order more fully to illustrate the mischief of denying a hearing to opinions because we, in our own judgment, have condemned them, it will be desirable to fix down the discussion to a concrete case; and i choose, by preference, the cases which are least favourable to me in which the argument against freedom of opinion, both on the score of truth and on that of utility, is considered the strongest. let the opinions impugned be the belief in a god and in a future state, or any of the commonly received doctrines of morality. to fight the battle on such ground, gives a great advantage to an unfair antagonist; since he will be sure to say (and many who have no desire to be unfair will say it internally), are these the doctrines which you do not deem sufficiently certain to be taken under the protection of law? is the belief in a god one of the opinions, to feel sure of which, you hold to be assuming infallibility? but i must be permitted to observe, that it is not the feeling sure of a doctrine (be it what it may) which i call an assumption of infallibility. it is the undertaking to decide that question for others, without allowing them to hear what can be said on the contrary side. and i denounce and reprobate this pretension not the less, if put forth on the side of my most solemn convictions. however positive any one's persuasion may be, not only of the falsity, but of the pernicious consequences not only of the pernicious consequences, but (to adopt expressions which i altogether condemn) the immorality and impiety of an opinion; yet if, in pursuance of that private judgment, though backed by the public judgment of his country or his contemporaries, he prevents the opinion from being heard in its defence, he assumes infallibility. and so far from the assumption being less objectionable or less dangerous because the opinion is called immoral or impious, this is the case of all others in which it is most fatal. these are exactly the occasions on which the men of one generation commit those dreadful mistakes, which excite the astonishment and horror of posterity. it is among such that we find the instances memorable in history, when the arm of the law has been employed to root out the best men and the noblest doctrines; with deplorable success as to the men, though some of the doctrines have survived to be (as if in mockery) invoked, in defence of similar conduct towards those who dissent from them, or from their received interpretation.
in order to illustrate more fully the badness of denying a hearing to opinions because we have condemned them, i should tie the discussion to a concrete case; and i freely choose the cases that are least favourable to me ones where the argument against freedom of opinion, both on the score of truth and on that of utility, is considered the strongest. let the opinions in question be the belief in a god and in life after death, or any of the commonly accepted doctrines of morality. fighting the battle on that ground gives a great advantage to an unfair opponent, who will be sure to say: are these the doctrines that you regard as not certain enough to deserve be taken under the protection of law? is the belief in a god one of the opinions that (according to you) one can't feel sure of without assuming that one is infallible? (indeed, many who have no desire to be unfair will say this internally.) allow me to point out that what i call an assumption of infallibility is not feeling sure of a doctrine but rather undertaking to decide that question for others, without letting them hear what can be said on the contrary side. and i denounce and deplore this claim just as much if it is put forth on the side of my own most solemn convictions. however sure someone is not only of the falsity of an opinion but also of its pernicious consequences, and even (to adopt expressions that i altogether condemn) of its immorality and impiety, if that private judgment leads him to prevent the opinion from being heard to defend itself he assumes infallibility even if his judgment is backed by the public judgment of his country or his contemporaries. and so far from the assumption of infallibility being less objectionable or less dangerous because the opinion is called immoral or impious, it is precisely with those opinions that the assumption is most fatal. it is on exactly those matters that the men of one generation commit the dreadful mistakes that arouse astonishment and horror in later generations. it is among them that we find the memorable historical instances where the arm of the law has been employed to root out the best men and the noblest doctrines; with deplorable success as regards the men, though some of the doctrines survived and (ironically) were later invoked in defence of similar conduct towards those who dissented from them or from their accepted interpretation.

mankind can hardly be too often reminded that there was once a man named socrates, between whom and the legal authorities and public opinion of his time, there took place a memorable collision. born in an age and country abounding in individual greatness, this man has been handed down to us by those who best knew both him and the age, as the most virtuous man in it; while we know him as the head and prototype of all subsequent teachers of virtue, the source equally of the lofty inspiration of plato and the judicious utilitarianism of aristotle, i maestri di color che sanno, the two headsprings of ethical as of all other philosophy. this acknowledged master of all the eminent thinkers who have since lived whose fame, still growing after more than two thousand years, all but outweighs the whole remainder of the names which make his native city illustrious was put to death by his countrymen, after a judicial conviction, for impiety and immorality. impiety, in denying the gods recognised by the state; indeed his accuser asserted (see the apologia) that he believed in no gods at all. immorality, in being, by his doctrines and instructions, a corruptor of youth. of these charges the tribunal, there is every ground for believing, honestly found him guilty, and condemned the man who probably of all then born had deserved best of mankind, to be put to death as a criminal.
mankind can hardly be too often reminded that there was once a man named socrates who came into a memorable collision with the legal authorities and public opinion of his time and place. born in an age and country abounding in individual greatness, this man has been reported to us. by those who best knew both him and his times, as the most virtuous man then alive. and we know him as the head and exemplary model for all subsequent teachers of virtue, the source of the lofty inspiration of plato and of the judicious utilitarianism of aristotle (the master of those who know, as dante called him), the two sources of ethical and of all other philosophy. this acknowledged master of all the eminent thinkers who have since lived a man whose fame, still growing after more than two thousand years, nearly outweighs all the other names that make his native city illustrious was judicially convicted and put to death by his countrymen for impiety and immorality. impiety in denying the gods recognized by the state (indeed his accuser said that socrates didn't believe in any gods). immorality in being, through his doctrines and instructions, a corrupter of youth. we have every ground for believing that the tribunal honestly found him guilty, and condemned to death as a criminal the man who was probably the best man who had ever lived up to that time.

to pass from this to the only other instance of judicial iniquity, the mention of which, after the condemnation of socrates, would not be an anticlimax: the event which took place on calvary rather more than eighteen hundred years ago. the man who left on the memory of those who witnessed his life and conversation, such an impression of his moral grandeur, that eighteen subsequent centuries have done homage to him as the almighty in person, was ignominiously put to death, as what? as a blasphemer. men did not merely mistake their benefactor; they mistook him for the exact contrary of what he was, and treated him as that prodigy of impiety, which they themselves are now held to be, for their treatment of him. the feelings with which mankind now regard these lamentable transactions, especially the later of the two, render them extremely unjust in their judgment of the unhappy actors. these were, to all appearance, not bad men not worse than men commonly are, but rather the contrary; men who possessed in a full, or somewhat more than a full measure, the religious, moral, and patriotic feelings of their time and people: the very kind of men who, in all times, our own included, have every chance of passing through life blameless and respected. the high-priest who rent his garments when the words were pronounced, which, according to all the ideas of his country, constituted the blackest guilt, was in all probability quite as sincere in his horror and indignation, as the generality of respectable and pious men now are in the religious and moral sentiments they profess; and most of those who now shudder at his conduct, if they had lived in his time, and been born jews, would have acted precisely as he did. orthodox christians who are tempted to think that those who stoned to death the first martyrs must have been worse men than they themselves are, ought to remember that one of those persecutors was saint paul.
after the condemnation of socrates, mention of most other instances of justice gone wrong would be an anticlimax, the one exception being the event that took place on calvary rather more than eighteen hundred years ago. the man who left on the memory of those who witnessed his life and conversation such an impression of his moral grandeur that eighteen subsequent centuries have done homage to him as god in person was ignominiously put to death as what? as a blasphemer! men didn't merely mistake their benefactor; they mistook him for the exact opposite of what he was, treating him as that monster of impiety that they are now held to be because of how they treated him. the feelings that mankind now have regarding these lamentable dealings with socrates and with jesus, especially the latter of the two, make them extremely unjust in their judgment of those who put the two death. these seem not to have been bad men not worse than men most commonly are, but rather the contrary; men who possessed a full or perhaps over-full measure of the religious, moral, and patriotic feelings of their time and people; just the kind of men who at any time ours included have every chance of passing through life blameless and respected. the high-priest who tore his garments when he heard the words that according to all the ideas of his country constituted the blackest guilt was probably quite as sincere in his horror and indignation as are the general run of respectable and pious men now in the religious and moral sentiments they proclaim; and most of those who now shudder at the high-priest's conduct, if they had lived in his time and been born jews, would have acted precisely as he did. orthodox christians who are tempted to think that those who stoned to death the first martyrs must have been worse men than they themselves are ought to remember that one of those persecutors was st. paul.

let us add one more example, the most striking of all, if the impressiveness of an error is measured by the wisdom and virtue of him who falls into it. if ever any one, possessed of power, had grounds for thinking himself the best and most enlightened among his cotemporaries, it was the emperor marcus aurelius. absolute monarch of the whole civilised world, he preserved through life not only the most unblemished justice, but what was less to be expected from his stoical breeding, the tenderest heart. the few failings which are attributed to him, were all on the side of indulgence: while his writings, the highest ethical product of the ancient mind, differ scarcely perceptibly, if they differ at all, from the most characteristic teachings of christ. this man, a better christian in all but the dogmatic sense of the word, than almost any of the ostensibly christian sovereigns who have since reigned, persecuted christianity. placed at the summit of all the previous attainments of humanity, with an open, unfettered intellect, and a character which led him of himself to embody in his moral writings the christian ideal, he yet failed to see that christianity was to be a good and not an evil to the world, with his duties to which he was so deeply penetrated. existing society he knew to be in a deplorable state. but such as it was, he saw, or thought he saw, that it was held together, and prevented from being worse, by belief and reverence of the received divinities. as a ruler of mankind, he deemed it his duty not to suffer society to fall in pieces; and saw not how, if its existing ties were removed, any others could be formed which could again knit it together. the new religion openly aimed at dissolving these ties: unless, therefore, it was his duty to adopt that religion, it seemed to be his duty to put it down. inasmuch then as the theology of christianity did not appear to him true or of divine origin; inasmuch as this strange history of a crucified god was not credible to him, and a system which purported to rest entirely upon a foundation to him so wholly unbelievable, could not be foreseen by him to be that renovating agency which, after all abatements, it has in fact proved to be; the gentlest and most amiable of philosophers and rulers, under a solemn sense of duty, authorised the persecution of christianity. to my mind this is one of the most tragical facts in all history. it is a bitter thought, how different a thing the christianity of the world might have been, if the christian faith had been adopted as the religion of the empire under the auspices of marcus aurelius instead of those of constantine. but it would be equally unjust to him and false to truth, to deny, that no one plea which can be urged for punishing anti-christian teaching, was wanting to marcus aurelius for punishing, as he did, the propagation of christianity. no christian more firmly believes that atheism is false, and tends to the dissolution of society, than marcus aurelius believed the same things of christianity; he who, of all men then living, might have been thought the most capable of appreciating it. unless any one who approves of punishment for the promulgation of opinions, flatters himself that he is a wiser and better man than marcus aurelius more deeply versed in the wisdom of his time, more elevated in his intellect above it more earnest in his search for truth, or more single-minded in his devotion to it when found; let him abstain from that assumption of the joint infallibility of himself and the multitude, which the great antoninus made with so unfortunate a result.
let me add one more example, the most striking of all, if the impressiveness of an error is measured by the wisdom and virtue of the person who falls into it! if anyone in a position of power ever had grounds for thinking himself the best and most enlightened among his contemporaries it was the emperor marcus aurelius. absolute monarch of the whole civilized world, he preserved through life not only the most untainted justice but also less to be expected from his stoic upbringing the tenderest heart. the few failings that are attributed to him were all on the side of leniency; and his writings, the highest ethical product of the ancient mind, differ little if at all from the most characteristic teachings of christ. this man, a better christian than almost any of the ostensibly christian sovereigns who have since reigned, persecuted christianity. (in calling marcus aurelius christian, i mean that in every sense of the word except the one having to do with the acceptance of dogmas.) placed at the summit of all the previous attainments of humanity, with an open and free intellect and a character that led him to embody in his moral writings the christian ideal, he nevertheless failed to see that christianity was going to be a good and not an evil to the world. he knew that existing society was in a deplorable state. but such as it was, he saw or thought he saw that it was held together and prevented from being worse by belief in and reverence for the accepted gods. as a ruler of mankind, with a deep sense of his duty to the world, he thought it his duty not to allow society to fall to pieces; and he didn't see how, if its existing ties were removed, any others could be formed to pull it back together. the new religion openly aimed at dissolving the existing ties; so it seemed to him that either it was his duty to adopt that religion or it was his duty to suppress it. well, then, the theology of christianity didn't appear to him true or of divine origin, this strange history of a crucified god was not credible to him, and a system that purported to be based on something he found so wholly unbelievable couldn't be foreseen to be an agency for renewal (which is what it has turned out to be, on balance). for these reasons this gentlest and most lovable of philosophers and rulers, acting on a solemn sense of duty, authorized the persecution of christianity. to my mind this is one of the most tragic facts in all history. it is bitter to think of how different the christianity of the world might have been if the christian faith had been adopted as the religion of the roman empire under the auspices of marcus aurelius instead of those of constantine. but in fairness to him and to the truth it must be admitted that any plea that can be urged for punishing anti-christian teaching today was available to marcus aurelius for punishing the propagation of christianity. no christian more firmly believes that atheism is false and tends to the dissolution of society than marcus aurelius believed the same things of christianity he who might have been thought more capable of appreciating it than anyone else then alive. to anyone who approves of punishment for spreading opinions, i say:

aware of the impossibility of defending the use of punishment for restraining irreligious opinions, by any argument which will not justify marcus antoninus, the enemies of religious freedom, when hard pressed, occasionally accept this consequence, and say, with dr. johnson, that the persecutors of christianity were in the right; that persecution is an ordeal through which truth ought to pass, and always passes successfully, legal penalties being, in the end, powerless against truth, though sometimes beneficially effective against mischievous errors. this is a form of the argument for religious intolerance, sufficiently remarkable not to be passed without notice.
unless you flatter yourself that you are a wiser and better man than marcus aurelius , more deeply informed about the wisdom of your time and more elevated in your intellect above it, more earnest in your search for truth, or more single-minded in your devotion to it when you find it you should abstain from that assumption of the joint infallibility of yourself and the multitude which the great antoninus made with such unfortunate results. some of the enemies of religious freedom are aware that they can't defend the use of punishment for restraining irreligious opinions by any argument that won't also justify marcus antoninus; and when they are hard pressed they accept this consequence and say, with dr. johnson, that the persecutors of christianity were in the right. they say that persecution is an ordeal through which truth ought to pass, and always passes successfully, legal penalties being ultimately powerless against truth but sometimes beneficially effective against mischievous errors. this form of the argument for religious intolerance is remarkable enough to deserve scrutiny.

a theory which maintains that truth may justifiably be persecuted because persecution cannot possibly do it any harm, cannot be charged with being intentionally hostile to the reception of new truths; but we cannot commend the generosity of its dealing with the persons to whom mankind are indebted for them. to discover to the world something which deeply concerns it, and of which it was previously ignorant; to prove to it that it had been mistaken on some vital point of temporal or spiritual interest, is as important a service as a human being can render to his fellow-creatures, and in certain cases, as in those of the early christians and of the reformers, those who think with dr. johnson believe it to have been the most precious gift which could be bestowed on mankind. that the authors of such splendid benefits should be requited by martyrdom; that their reward should be to be dealt with as the vilest of criminals, is not, upon this theory, a deplorable error and misfortune, for which humanity should mourn in sackcloth and ashes, but the normal and justifiable state of things. the propounder of a new truth, according to this doctrine, should stand, as stood, in the legislation of the locrians, the proposer of a new law, with a halter round his neck, to be instantly tightened if the public assembly did not, on hearing his reasons, then and there adopt his proposition. people who defend this mode of treating benefactors, cannot be supposed to set much value on the benefit; and i believe this view of the subject is mostly confined to the sort of persons who think that new truths may have been desirable once, but that we have had enough of them now.
a theory that maintains that truth may justifiably be persecuted because persecution can't possibly do it any harm cannot be accused of deliberate hostility to the reception of new truths; but we can't congratulate it on the generosity of its treatment of the persons through whom such truths have been brought to mankind! to reveal to the world something that deeply concerns it and that it didn't previously know, to show the world that it had been mistaken on some vital point of worldly or spiritual concern, is as important a service as a human being can render to his fellow-creatures; and in certain cases, such as in those of the early christians and of the leaders of the reformation, dr. johnson and his fellow-believers think it to have been the most precious gift that could be bestowed on mankind. that the authors of such splendid benefits should be repaid by martyrdom, that they should be rewarded by being treated as the vilest of criminals, is not on this theory a deplorable error and misfortune for which humanity should mourn in sackcloth and ashes, but rather is the normal and justifiable state of things. according to this doctrine, the propounder of a new truth should stand (like the proposer of a new law in the legislature of ancient locris) with a halter around his neck, to be instantly tightened if the public assembly, after hearing his reasons, doesn't immediately adopt his proposition. people who defend this way of treating benefactors evidently don't set much value on the benefit! i think that this view of the subject is mostly confined to the sort of persons who think that new truths may have been desirable once but that we have had enough of them now!

but, indeed, the dictum that truth always triumphs over persecution, is one of those pleasant falsehoods which men repeat after one another till they pass into commonplaces, but which all experience refutes. history teems with instances of truth put down by persecution. if not suppressed for ever, it may be thrown back for centuries. to speak only of religious opinions: the reformation broke out at least twenty times before luther, and was put down. arnold of brescia was put down. fra dolcino was put down. savonarola was put down. the albigeois were put down. the vaudois were put down. the lollards were put down. the hussites were put down. even after the era of luther, wherever persecution was persisted in, it was successful. in spain, italy, flanders, the austrian empire, protestantism was rooted out; and, most likely, would have been so in england, had queen mary lived, or queen elizabeth died. persecution has always succeeded, save where the heretics were too strong a party to be effectually persecuted. no reasonable person can doubt that christianity might have been extirpated in the roman empire. it spread, and became predominant, because the persecutions were only occasional, lasting but a short time, and separated by long intervals of almost undisturbed propagandism. it is a piece of idle sentimentality that truth, merely as truth, has any inherent power denied to error, of prevailing against the dungeon and the stake. men are not more zealous for truth than they often are for error, and a sufficient application of legal or even of social penalties will generally succeed in stopping the propagation of either. the real advantage which truth has, consists in this, that when an opinion is true, it may be extinguished once, twice, or many times, but in the course of ages there will generally be found persons to rediscover it, until some one of its reappearances falls on a time when from favourable circumstances it escapes persecution until it has made such head as to withstand all subsequent attempts to suppress it.
anyway, the dictum that truth always triumphs over persecution is one of those pleasant falsehoods that men repeat after one another until they become common knowledge, but which all experience refutes. history teems with instances of truth put down by persecution. even if not suppressed forever, it can be thrown back for centuries. to speak only of religious opinions: the reformation broke out at least twenty times before luther, and was put down. even after the era of luther, wherever persecution was persisted in it was successful. in spain, italy, flanders, the austrian empire, protestantism was rooted out; and it would probably have been rooted out in england too if queen mary had lived longer or queen elizabeth had died sooner. persecution has always succeeded except where the heretics were too strong a party to be effectively persecuted. no reasonable person can doubt that christianity could have been wiped out in the roman empire. it spread and became predominant because the persecutions were intermittent, lasting for only a short time and separated by long intervals of almost undisturbed christian propagandizing. it is a piece of idle sentimentality that truth as such has an inherent power, lacked by error, of prevailing against the dungeon and the stake. men are not more zealous for truth than they often are for error, and a sufficient application of legal or even of social penalties will generally succeed in stopping the propagation of either. the real advantage that truth has is just this: when an opinion is true, it may be extinguished once or many times, but through the centuries there will generally be found persons to rediscover it, until some one of its reappearances comes at a time when circumstances are favourable to its escaping persecution until it has made enough headway to withstand all subsequent attempts to suppress it.

it will be said, that we do not now put to death the introducers of new opinions: we are not like our fathers who slew the prophets, we even build sepulchres to them. it is true we no longer put heretics to death; and the amount of penal infliction which modern feeling would probably tolerate, even against the most obnoxious opinions, is not sufficient to extirpate them. but let us not flatter ourselves that we are yet free from the stain even of legal persecution. penalties for opinion, or at least for its expression, still exist by law; and their enforcement is not, even in these times, so unexampled as to make it at all incredible that they may some day be revived in full force. in the year 1857, at the summer assizes of the county of cornwall, an unfortunate man, said to be of unexceptionable conduct in all relations of life, was sentenced to twenty-one months imprisonment, for uttering, and writing on a gate, some offensive words concerning christianity. within a month of the same time, at the old bailey, two persons, on two separate occasions, were rejected as jurymen, and one of them grossly insulted by the judge and by one of the counsel, because they honestly declared that they had no theological belief; and a third, a foreigner, for the same reason, was denied justice against a thief. this refusal of redress took place in virtue of the legal doctrine, that no person can be allowed to give evidence in a court of justice, who does not profess belief in a god (any god is sufficient) and in a future state; which is equivalent to declaring such persons to be outlaws, excluded from the protection of the tribunals; who may not only be robbed or assaulted with impunity, if no one but themselves, or persons of similar opinions, be present, but any one else may be robbed or assaulted with impunity, if the proof of the fact depends on their evidence. the assumption on which this is grounded, is that the oath is worthless, of a person who does not believe in a future state; a proposition which betokens much ignorance of history in those who assent to it (since it is historically true that a large proportion of infidels in all ages have been persons of distinguished integrity and honour); and would be maintained by no one who had the smallest conception how many of the persons in greatest repute with the world, both for virtues and for attainments, are well known, at least to their intimates, to be unbelievers. the rule, besides, is suicidal, and cuts away its own foundation. under pretence that atheists must be liars, it admits the testimony of all atheists who are willing to lie, and rejects only those who brave the obloquy of publicly confessing a detested creed rather than affirm a falsehood. a rule thus self-convicted of absurdity so far as regards its professed purpose, can be kept in force only as a badge of hatred, a relic of persecution; a persecution, too, having the peculiarity, that the qualification for undergoing it, is the being clearly proved not to deserve it. the rule, and the theory it implies, are hardly less insulting to believers than to infidels. for if he who does not believe in a future state, necessarily lies, it follows that they who do believe are only prevented from lying, if prevented they are, by the fear of hell. we will not do the authors and abettors of the rule the injury of supposing, that the conception which they have formed of christian virtue is drawn from their own consciousness.
this will be said: we don't now put to death the introducers of new opinions; we aren't like our ancestors who slew the prophets; we even build monuments to them. it is true that we no longer put heretics to death; and even against the most obnoxious opinions modern feeling probably wouldn't tolerate punishments severe enough to wipe them out. but let us not flatter ourselves that we are now free from the stain even of legal persecution. penalties for opinions, or at least for expressing them, still exist by law; and even today their enforcement is not so rare as to make it at all incredible that they may some day be revived in full force. in the year 1857 only two years before this essay was first published an unfortunate man was sentenced to twenty-one months imprisonment for uttering and writing on a gate some offensive words concerning christianity. (this happened at the summer assizes of the county of cornwall. the man is said to be of unexceptionable conduct in every aspect of life.) less than a month later, at the old bailey, two people on two separate occasions were rejected as jurymen, and one of them was grossly insulted by the judge and by one of the lawyers, because they honestly declared that they had no theological beliefs. a third person, a foreigner, was for the same reason denied justice against a thief. this refusal of remedy was based on the legal doctrine that a person cannot be allowed to give evidence in a court of justice if he doesn't proclaim a belief in a god (any god will do) and in a life after death. this doctrine is equivalent to declaring such a person to be an outlaw, someone excluded from the protection of the courts; it implies not only that he may be robbed or assaulted with impunity if no-one but himself or people who think as he does are present, but also that anyone else may be robbed or assaulted with impunity if the proof of the crime depends on his evidence. the underlying assumption here is that someone's oath is worthless if he doesn't believe in a life after death. someone who believes this must be very ignorant of history, since it is historically true that a large proportion of unbelievers in all ages have been people of distinguished integrity and honour. this proposition wouldn't be maintained by anyone who had the slightest conception how many of those persons who stand in greatest repute with the world, both for virtues and for attainments, are well known (at least to their intimates) to be unbelievers. furthermore, the rule is suicidal! it cuts away its own foundation: on the claim that atheists must be liars, it accepts the testimony of all atheists who are willing to lie, and rejects only those who brave the disgrace of publicly owning to a detested creed rather than affirming a falsehood. a rule thus self-convicted of absurdity so far as regards its professed purpose can be kept in force only as a badge of hatred, a relic of persecution. and it is a very strange persecution, because what qualifies one for undergoing it is clearly proving that one doesn't deserve it! the rule and the theory behind it are almost as insulting to believers as to unbelievers. for if he who doesn't believe in a future state necessarily lies, it follows that those who do believe are prevented from lying if indeed they are only by the fear of hell.

these, indeed, are but rags and remnants of persecution, and may be thought to be not so much an indication of the wish to persecute, as an example of that very frequent infirmity of english minds, which makes them take a preposterous pleasure in the assertion of a bad principle, when they are no longer bad enough to desire to carry it really into practice. but unhappily there is no security in the state of the public mind, that the suspension of worse forms of legal persecution, which has lasted for about the space of a generation, will continue. in this age the quiet surface of routine is as often ruffled by attempts to resuscitate past evils, as to introduce new benefits. what is boasted of at the present time as the revival of religion, is always, in narrow and uncultivated minds, at least as much the revival of bigotry; and where there is the strong permanent leaven of intolerance in the feelings of a people, which at all times abides in the middle classes of this country, it needs but little to provoke them into actively persecuting those whom they have never ceased to think proper objects of persecution. for it is this it is the opinions men entertain, and the feelings they cherish, respecting those who disown the beliefs they deem important, which makes this country not a place of mental freedom. for a long time past, the chief mischief of the legal penalties is that they strengthen the social stigma. it is that stigma which is really effective, and so effective is it that the profession of opinions which are under the ban of society is much less common in england, than is, in many other countries, the avowal of those which incur risk of judicial punishment. in respect to all persons but those whose pecuniary circumstances make them independent of the good will of other people, opinion, on this subject, is as efficacious as law; men might as well be imprisoned, as excluded from the means of earning their bread. those whose bread is already secured, and who desire no favours from men in power, or from bodies of men, or from the public, have nothing to fear from the open avowal of any opinions, but to be ill-thought of and ill-spoken of, and this it ought not to require a very heroic mould to enable them to bear. there is no room for any appeal ad misericordiam
these, indeed, are merely rags and remnants of persecution, and may be thought to be not so much an indication of the wish to persecute as an example of that very frequent infirmity of english minds, which makes them take a preposterous pleasure in the assertion of a bad principle when they are no longer bad enough to want to carry it really into practice. but unfortunately the state of the public mind doesn't give us a guarantee that the suspension of worse forms of legal persecution, which has lasted for about one generation, will continue. at this time the quiet surface of routine is ruffled as often by attempts to revive past evils as it is by attempts to introduce new benefits. what is boasted of at the present time as the revival of religion is always, in narrow and undeveloped minds, at least as much the revival of bigotry; and where there is the strongest permanent leaven of intolerance in the feelings of a people as there always is in the middle classes of this country it doesn't take much to provoke them into actively persecuting those whom they have never ceased to regard as proper objects of persecution.

those in whose eyes this reticence on the part of heretics is no evil, should consider in the first place, that in consequence of it there is never any fair and thorough discussion of heretical opinions; and that such of them as could not stand such a discussion, though they may be prevented from spreading, do not disappear. but it is not the minds of heretics that are deteriorated most, by the ban placed on all inquiry which does not end in the orthodox conclusions. the greatest harm done is to those who are not heretics, and whose whole mental development is cramped, and their reason cowed, by the fear of heresy. who can compute what the world loses in the multitude of promising intellects combined with timid characters, who dare not follow out any bold, vigorous, independent train of thought, lest it should land them in something which would admit of being considered irreligious or immoral? among them we may occasionally see some man of deep conscientiousness, and subtle and refined understanding, who spends a life in sophisticating with an intellect which he cannot silence, and exhausts the resources of ingenuity in attempting to reconcile the promptings of his conscience and reason with orthodoxy, which yet he does not, perhaps, to the end succeed in doing. no one can be a great thinker who does not recognise, that as a thinker it is his first duty to follow his intellect to whatever conclusions it may lead. truth gains more even by the errors of one who, with due study and preparation, thinks for himself, than by the true opinions of those who only hold them because they do not suffer themselves to think. not that it is solely, or chiefly, to form great thinkers, that freedom of thinking is required. on the contrary, it is as much, and even more indispensable, to enable average human beings to attain the mental stature which they are capable of. there have been, and may again be, great individual thinkers, in a general atmosphere of mental slavery. but there never has been, nor ever will be, in that atmosphere, an intellectually active people. where any people has made a temporary approach to such a character, it has been because the dread of heterodox speculation was for a time suspended. where there is a tacit convention that principles are not to be disputed; where the discussion of the greatest questions which can occupy humanity is considered to be closed, we cannot hope to find that generally high scale of mental activity which has made some periods of history so remarkable. never when controversy avoided the subjects which are large and important enough to kindle enthusiasm, was the mind of a people stirred up from its foundations, and the impulse given which raised even persons of the most ordinary intellect to something of the dignity of thinking beings. of such we have had an example in the condition of europe during the times immediately following the reformation; another, though limited to the continent and to a more cultivated class, in the speculative movement of the latter half of the eighteenth century; and a third, of still briefer duration, in the intellectual fermentation of germany during the goethian and fichtean period. these periods differed widely in the particular opinions which they developed; but were alike in this, that during all three the yoke of authority was broken. in each, an old mental despotism had been thrown off, and no new one had yet taken its place. the impulse given at these three periods has made europe what it now is. every single improvement which has taken place either in the human mind or in institutions, may be traced distinctly to one or other of them. appearances have for some time indicated that all three impulses are well-nigh spent; and we can expect no fresh start, until we again assert our mental freedom.
but the worst harm done by banning all inquiry that doesn't end in orthodox conclusions is not to the minds of heretics but to those who aren't heretics, and whose whole mental development is cramped, and their reason intimidated, by the fear of coming to accept what turns out to be heresy. who can calculate what the world loses in the multitude of promising intellects combined with timid characters people who don't dare to follow out any bold, vigorous, independent train of thought for fear that it will land them in something that might be thought irreligious or immoral? among them we may occasionally see some man of deep conscientiousness, and subtle and refined understanding, who spends his life fine-tuning his faith with an intellect that he can't silence, exhausting the resources of ingenuity in an attempt to reconcile the promptings of his conscience and reason with orthodoxy, perhaps never succeeding in doing so. no-one can be a great thinker if he doesn't recognize that his first duty as a thinker is to follow his intellect to whatever conclusions it may lead to. someone who with due study and preparation thinks for himself does more to advance the truth, even in his errors, than is done by the true opinions of those who hold them only because they don't allow themselves to think. not that it is primarily let alone solely to form great thinkers that freedom of thought is required. on the contrary, it is even more indispensable for enabling average human beings to reach the highest mental level they are capable of. there have been, and may again be, great individual thinkers in a general atmosphere of mental slavery. but there never was and never will be, in that atmosphere, an intellectually active people. where any people the populace of any country has temporarily moved towards being intellectually active, that has been because the fear of unorthodox theorizing was temporarily suspended. where on the other hand there is a silent understanding that principles aren't to be disputed where the discussion of the greatest questions that can occupy humanity is considered to be closed we can't hope to find the generally high level of mental activity that has made some periods of history so remarkable. whenever the big subjects the ones large and important enough to kindle enthusiasm were protected from controversy, the mind of the populace wasn't stirred up from its foundations, with even persons of the most ordinary intellect being pushed into something of the dignity of thinking beings. we had an example of such a push in the condition of europe in the period immediately following the reformation; another, though limited to continental europe and to a more cultivated class, in the theorizing movement of the second half of the eighteenth century; and a third, of still briefer duration, in the intellectual fermentation of germany during the period influenced by goethe and fichte. these periods differed widely in what particular opinions they developed; but they had this in common: during all three the yoke of authority was broken. in each period, an old mental despotism had been thrown off and no new one had yet taken its place. the push given at these three periods has made europe what it now is. every single improvement that has taken place in the human mind or in human institutions can be clearly traced back to one or other of them. for some time now it has seemed that all three of those pushes are just about exhausted; and we can't expect a fresh start until we again assert our mental freedom.

let us now pass to the second division of the argument, and dismissing the supposition that any of the received opinions may be false, let us assume them to be true, and examine into the worth of the manner in which they are likely to be held, when their truth is not freely and openly canvassed. however unwillingly a person who has a strong opinion may admit the possibility that his opinion may be false, he ought to be moved by the consideration that however true it may be, if it is not fully, frequently, and fearlessly discussed, it will be held as a dead dogma, not a living truth.
let us now pass to the second branch of the argument dismissing the thought of falsehood in the publicly accepted opinions, let us assume them to be true; and on that basis let us look into the value of how they are likely to be held, given that their truth is not freely and openly discussed, pro and con. however unwilling a person who has a strong opinion may be to admit that his opinion might be false, he ought to be moved by this thought: however true it may be, if it isn't fully, frequently and fearlessly discussed, it will be held as a dead dogma rather than as a living truth.

there is a class of persons (happily not quite so numerous as formerly) who think it enough if a person assents undoubtingly to what they think true, though he has no knowledge whatever of the grounds of the opinion, and could not make a tenable defence of it against the most superficial objections. such persons, if they can once get their creed taught from authority, naturally think that no good, and some harm, comes of its being allowed to be questioned. where their influence prevails, they make it nearly impossible for the received opinion to be rejected wisely and considerately, though it may still be rejected rashly and ignorantly; for to shut out discussion entirely is seldom possible, and when it once gets in, beliefs not grounded on conviction are apt to give way before the slightest semblance of an argument. waiving, however, this possibility assuming that the true opinion abides in the mind, but abides as a prejudice, a belief independent of, and proof against, argument this is not the way in which truth ought to be held by a rational being. this is not knowing the truth. truth, thus held, is but one superstition the more, accidentally clinging to the words which enunciate a truth.
there are people (fortunately not quite as many as there used to be) who will be satisfied if you assent undoubtingly to something that they think is true, even if you have no knowledge whatever of the grounds for the belief in question and couldn't defend it decently against the most superficial objections. when such people get their creed to be taught as authoritative, they naturally think that no good and some harm will come from allowing it to be questioned. where their influence is dominant, they make it nearly impossible for the publicly accepted opinion to be rejected wisely and considerately. it may still be rejected rashly and ignorantly; for it is seldom possible to shut off discussion entirely, and once discussion gets started, beliefs that are held as creeds rather than being based on reasons are apt to give way before the slightest semblance of an argument. set aside that possibility, and take the case where the true opinion remains in the person's mind, but sits there as a prejudice, a belief that owes nothing to argument and isn't vulnerable to argument this isn't the way truth ought to be held by a rational being! this is not knowing the truth. truth when accepted in that way is merely one more superstition, accidentally clinging to words that enunciate a genuine truth.

if the intellect and judgment of mankind ought to be cultivated, a thing which protestants at least do not deny, on what can these faculties be more appropriately exercised by any one, than on the things which concern him so much that it is considered necessary for him to hold opinions on them? if the cultivation of the understanding consists in one thing more than in another, it is surely in learning the grounds of one's own opinions. whatever people believe, on subjects on which it is of the first importance to believe rightly, they ought to be able to defend against at least the common objections. but, some one may say, let them be taught the grounds of their opinions. it does not follow that opinions must be merely parroted because they are never heard controverted. persons who learn geometry do not simply commit the theorems to memory, but understand and learn likewise the demonstrations; and it would be absurd to say that they remain ignorant of the grounds of geometrical truths, because they never hear any one deny, and attempt to disprove them. undoubtedly: and such teaching suffices on a subject like mathematics, where there is nothing at all to be said on the wrong side of the question. the peculiarity of the evidence of mathematical truths is, that all the argument is on one side. there are no objections, and no answers to objections. but on every subject on which difference of opinion is possible, the truth depends on a balance to be struck between two sets of conflicting reasons. even in natural philosophy, there is always some other explanation possible of the same facts; some geocentric theory instead of heliocentric, some phlogiston instead of oxygen; and it has to be shown why that other theory cannot be the true one: and until this is shown, and until we know how it is shown, we do not understand the grounds of our opinion. but when we turn to subjects infinitely more complicated, to morals, religion, politics, social relations, and the business of life, three-fourths of the arguments for every disputed opinion consist in dispelling the appearances which favour some opinion different from it. the greatest orator, save one, of antiquity, has left it on record that he always studied his adversary's case with as great, if not with still greater, intensity than even his own. what cicero practised as the means of forensic success, requires to be imitated by all who study any subject in order to arrive at the truth. he who knows only his own side of the case, knows little of that. his reasons may be good, and no one may have been able to refute them. but if he is equally unable to refute the reasons on the opposite side; if he does not so much as know what they are, he has no ground for preferring either opinion. the rational position for him would be suspension of judgment, and unless he contents himself with that, he is either led by authority, or adopts, like the generality of the world, the side to which he feels most inclination. nor is it enough that he should hear the arguments of adversaries from his own teachers, presented as they state them, and accompanied by what they offer as refutations. that is not the way to do justice to the arguments, or bring them into real contact with his own mind. he must be able to hear them from persons who actually believe them; who defend them in earnest, and do their very utmost for them. he must know them in their most plausible and persuasive form; he must feel the whole force of the difficulty which the true view of the subject has to encounter and dispose of; else he will never really possess himself of the portion of truth which meets and removes that difficulty. ninety-nine in a hundred of what are called educated men are in this condition; even of those who can argue fluently for their opinions. their conclusion may be true, but it might be false for anything they know: they have never thrown themselves into the mental position of those who think differently from them, and considered what such persons may have to say; and consequently they do not, in any proper sense of the word, know the doctrine which they themselves profess. they do not know those parts of it which explain and justify the remainder; the considerations which show that a fact which seemingly conflicts with another is reconcilable with it, or that, of two apparently strong reasons, one and not the other ought to be preferred. all that part of the truth which turns the scale, and decides the judgment of a completely informed mind, they are strangers to; nor is it ever really known, but to those who have attended equally and impartially to both sides, and endeavoured to see the reasons of both in the strongest light. so essential is this discipline to a real understanding of moral and human subjects, that if opponents of all important truths do not exist, it is indispensable to imagine them, and supply them with the strongest arguments which the most skilful devil's advocate can conjure up.
let them be taught what the grounds are for their opinions. just because they never hear the opinions being disputed it doesn't follow that they are merely parroting them. persons who learn geometry don't simply commit the theorems to memory, but understand and remember the demonstrations; and it would be absurd to say that they remain ignorant of the grounds of geometrical truths because they never hear anyone deny them and try to disprove them. undoubtedly; and such teaching suffices in a subject like mathematics, where there is nothing at all to be said on the wrong side of the question. that's what is special about the evidentness of mathematical truths: all the argument is on one side. there are no objections, and no answers to objections. but on every subject on which difference of opinion is possible, the truth depends on a balance to be struck between two sets of conflicting reasons. even in natural science there is always some other explanation possible of the same facts; some theory with the earth at the centre instead of the sun, some theory explaining combustion in terms of phlogiston rather than of oxygen; and it has to be shown why that other theory can't be the true one. until this is shown and we know how it is shown, we don't understand the grounds for accepting the theory that we do accept. but when we turn to infinitely more complicated subjects to morals, religion, politics, social relations, and the business of life three quarters of the arguments for every controversial opinion consist in dispelling the appearances that favour some opinion different from it. the second-greatest of the ancient orators has left it on record that he always studied his adversary's case as intensely as he did his own, if not even more so. what cicero (the orator in question) practised as the means of success in the law courts should be imitated by anyone who studies any subject in order to arrive at the truth. he who knows only his own side of the case doesn't know much about it. his reasons may be good, and no-one may have been able to refute them; but if he is equally unable to refute the reasons on the opposite side, and doesn't even know what they are, he has no ground for preferring either opinion. the rational position for him would be to suspend judgment, and if he doesn't settle for that, he is either being led by authority or doing what most people do, which is to adopt the side to which he feels most strongly drawn. it isn't enough that he should hear the arguments of opponents from his own teachers, presented in their way and accompanied by what they offer as refutations. that isn't the way to do justice to the opposing arguments, or to bring them into real contact with his own mind. he must be able to hear them from people who actually believe them, defend them in earnest, and do their very best for them. if he doesn't know them in their most plausible and persuasive form, and doesn't feel the whole force of the difficulty that the true view of the subject his view has to encounter and dispose of, he will never really possess the portion of truth that meets and removes that difficulty. ninety-nine per cent of what are called educated men are in this condition, even of those who can argue fluently for their opinions. perhaps their conclusion is true, but it might be false for all they know to the contrary. they haven't put themselves in the mental position of those who think differently from them, and considered what such opponents may have to say; and consequently they don't in any proper sense of the word know the doctrine that they themselves proclaim. they don't know the parts of it that explain and justify the rest. they don't know the considerations showing that an apparent theoretical conflict can be reconciled, or that of two apparently strong reasons one and not the other ought to be preferred. they are strangers to all that part of the truth that tips the balance and decides how a completely informed mind should judge; and that won't ever be really known except by those who have attended equally and impartially to both sides, and tried to see the reasons for both in the strongest light. this discipline is essential to a real understanding of moral and human subjects so much so that if any important truth doesn't have any opponents we must imagine them and supply them with the strongest arguments that the most skillful prosecutor can come up with.

to abate the force of these considerations, an enemy of free discussion may be supposed to say, that there is no necessity for mankind in general to know and understand all that can be said against or for their opinions by philosophers and theologians. that it is not needful for common men to be able to expose all the misstatements or fallacies of an ingenious opponent. that it is enough if there is always somebody capable of answering them, so that nothing likely to mislead uninstructed persons remains unrefuted. that simple minds, having been taught the obvious grounds of the truths inculcated on them, may trust to authority for the rest, and being aware that they have neither knowledge nor talent to resolve every difficulty which can be raised, may repose in the assurance that all those which have been raised have been or can be answered, by those who are specially trained to the task.
to lessen the force of these considerations, an enemy of free discussion might say this: there is no need for mankind in general to know and understand all that can be said against or for their opinions by philosophers and theologians. there is no need for common people to be able to expose all the misstatements or fallacies of an ingenious opponent. it is enough if there is always somebody capable of answering them, so that anything that is likely to mislead uneducated persons will be refuted. simple minds, having been taught the obvious grounds of the truths they have learned, may trust to authority for the rest. they are aware that they have neither knowledge nor talent to resolve every difficulty that can be raised, and can feel secure in the thought that all the difficulties that have been raised have been (or can be)answered by those who are specially trained for that task.

conceding to this view of the subject the utmost that can be claimed for it by those most easily satisfied with the amount of understanding of truth which ought to accompany the belief of it; even so, the argument for free discussion is no way weakened. for even this doctrine acknowledges that mankind ought to have a rational assurance that all objections have been satisfactorily answered; and how are they to be answered if that which requires to be answered is not spoken? or how can the answer be known to be satisfactory, if the objectors have no opportunity of showing that it is unsatisfactory? if not the public, at least the philosophers and theologians who are to resolve the difficulties, must make themselves familiar with those difficulties in their most puzzling form; and this cannot be accomplished unless they are freely stated, and placed in the most advantageous light which they admit of. the catholic church has its own way of dealing with this embarrassing problem. it makes a broad separation between those who can be permitted to receive its doctrines on conviction, and those who must accept them on trust. neither, indeed, are allowed any choice as to what they will accept; but the clergy, such at least as can be fully confided in, may admissibly and meritoriously make themselves acquainted with the arguments of opponents, in order to answer them, and may, therefore, read heretical books; the laity, not unless by special permission, hard to be obtained. this discipline recognises a knowledge of the enemy's case as beneficial to the teachers, but finds means, consistent with this, of denying it to the rest of the world: thus giving to the elite more mental culture, though not more mental freedom, than it allows to the mass. by this device it succeeds in obtaining the kind of mental superiority which its purposes require; for though culture without freedom never made a large and liberal mind, it can make a clever nisi prius advocate of a cause. but in countries professing protestantism, this resource is denied; since protestants hold, at least in theory, that the responsibility for the choice of a religion must be borne by each for himself, and cannot be thrown off upon teachers. besides, in the present state of the world, it is practically impossible that writings which are read by the instructed can be kept from the uninstructed. if the teachers of mankind are to be cognisant of all that they ought to know, everything must be free to be written and published without restraint.
what i am up against here are people who don't demand that belief in a truth should be accompanied by much understanding of it. well, for purposes of argument i shall concede to them that the above line of thought is right i'll let them have as much of it as they could possibly claim. even with that much conceded, the argument for free discussion is in no way weakened. for even this doctrine acknowledges that mankind ought to have a rational assurance that all objections have been satisfactorily answered; and how can they be answered if they haven't been uttered? also, how can an answer be known to be satisfactory if the objectors have no opportunity to show that it is not? if not the public, then at least the philosophers and theologians who are to resolve the difficulties must become familiar with them in their most challenging form; and this can't happen unless the difficulties are freely stated and placed in the most advantageous light that they are capable of. the catholic church has its own way of dealing with this embarrassing problem. it makes a sweeping distinction between those who can be permitted to receive its doctrines through becoming convinced of them and those who must take them on trust. neither group is allowed any choice as to what they will accept; but the clergy or such of them as can be fully trusted are allowed and even encouraged to make themselves acquainted with the arguments of opponents, in order to answer them; so they are permitted to read heretical books. lay people may not do this without special permission, which is hard to obtain. this system recognizes that it is beneficial for teachers to know the enemy's case, but finds a way of combining this with a denial of such knowledge to the rest of the world thus giving to the elite more mental culture than it allows to the mass, though not more mental freedom! by this device it succeeds in obtaining the kind of mental superiority that its purposes require; for although culture without freedom never made a large and liberal mind, it can make a clever advocate of a cause. but in protestant countries this resource isn't available, because protestants hold, at least in theory, that the responsibility for the choice of a religion must be borne by each person for himself, and can't be passed off onto teachers. besides, in the present state of the world, it is practically impossible that writings that are read by the instructed can be kept from the uninstructed. if mankind's teachers are to know all that they ought to know, everything must be free to be written and published without restraint.

if, however, the mischievous operation of the absence of free discussion, when the received opinions are true, were confined to leaving men ignorant of the grounds of those opinions, it might be thought that this, if an intellectual, is no moral evil, and does not affect the worth of the opinions, regarded in their influence on the character. the fact, however, is, that not only the grounds of the opinion are forgotten in the absence of discussion, but too often the meaning of the opinion itself. the words which convey it, cease to suggest ideas, or suggest only a small portion of those they were originally employed to communicate. instead of a vivid conception and a living belief, there remain only a few phrases retained by rote; or, if any part, the shell and husk only of the meaning is retained, the finer essence being lost. the great chapter in human history which this fact occupies and fills, cannot be too earnestly studied and meditated on.
here is something that might be thought: when the publicly accepted opinions are true, if the harm done by the absence of free discussion of them were merely that men are left ignorant of the grounds of those opinions, this may be an intellectual evil but it isn't a moral one; it doesn't affect the value of the opinions so far as their influence on character is concerned. in fact, however, the absence of discussion leads men to forget not only the grounds for an opinion but too often also its meaning. the words in which it is expressed cease to suggest ideas, or suggest only a small portion of the ideas they were originally used to communicate. instead of a vivid conception and a living belief, there remain only a few phrases learned by heart; or if any part of the meaning is retained it is only the shell and husk of it, the finer essence being lost. this fact fills a great chapter in human history one that cannot be too earnestly studied and meditated on.

it is illustrated in the experience of almost all ethical doctrines and religious creeds. they are all full of meaning and vitality to those who originate them, and to the direct disciples of the originators. their meaning continues to be felt in undiminished strength, and is perhaps brought out into even fuller consciousness, so long as the struggle lasts to give the doctrine or creed an ascendency over other creeds. at last it either prevails, and becomes the general opinion, or its progress stops; it keeps possession of the ground it has gained, but ceases to spread further. when either of these results has become apparent, controversy on the subject flags, and gradually dies away. the doctrine has taken its place, if not as a received opinion, as one of the admitted sects or divisions of opinion: those who hold it have generally inherited, not adopted it; and conversion from one of these doctrines to another, being now an exceptional fact, occupies little place in the thoughts of their professors. instead of being, as at first, constantly on the alert either to defend themselves against the world, or to bring the world over to them, they have subsided into acquiescence, and neither listen, when they can help it, to arguments against their creed, nor trouble dissentients (if there be such) with arguments in its favour. from this time may usually be dated the decline in the living power of the doctrine. we often hear the teachers of all creeds lamenting the difficulty of keeping up in the minds of believers a lively apprehension of the truth which they nominally recognise, so that it may penetrate the feelings, and acquire a real mastery over the conduct. no such difficulty is complained of while the creed is still fighting for its existence: even the weaker combatants then know and feel what they are fighting for, and the difference between it and other doctrines; and in that period of every creed's existence, not a few persons may be found, who have realised its fundamental principles in all the forms of thought, have weighed and considered them in all their important bearings, and have experienced the full effect on the character, which belief in that creed ought to produce in a mind thoroughly imbued with it. but when it has come to be a hereditary creed, and to be received passively, not actively when the mind is no longer compelled, in the same degree as at first, to exercise its vital powers on the questions which its belief presents to it, there is a progressive tendency to forget all of the belief except the formularies, or to give it a dull and torpid assent, as if accepting it on trust dispensed with the necessity of realising it in consciousness, or testing it by personal experience; until it almost ceases to connect itself at all with the inner life of the human being. then are seen the cases, so frequent in this age of the world as almost to form the majority, in which the creed remains as it were outside the mind, encrusting and petrifying it against all other influences addressed to the higher parts of our nature; manifesting its power by not suffering any fresh and living conviction to get in, but itself doing nothing for the mind or heart, except standing sentinel over them to keep them vacant.
it is illustrated in the experience of almost all ethical doctrines and religious creeds. they are all full of meaning and vitality to those who originate them, and to their immediate disciples. as long as a doctrine or creed is struggling for ascendancy over other creeds, its meaning continues to be felt as strongly as and perhaps even more strongly than it was at the outset. eventually either it prevails and becomes the general opinion or its progress stops, in which case it keeps possession of the ground it has gained but doesn't spread any further. when either of these results has become apparent, controversy about the doctrine slackens and gradually dies away. the doctrine has taken its place as a publicly accepted opinion or as one of the recognized sects or divisions of opinion; most of its present adherents have inherited it rather than being convinced of it by reasons, and they don't give much thought to the idea of anyone's being converted from their doctrine to some other, because such conversions happen so rarely. at first they were constantly on the alert, either to defend themselves against the world or to bring the world over to their side; but now they have subsided into a passive state in which they don't (if they can help it) listen to arguments against their creed, and don't trouble dissentients (if there are any) with arguments in its favour. it is usually at about this stage in its history that the doctrine starts to lose its living power. we often hear the teachers of all creeds lamenting the difficulty of keeping up in the minds of believers a lively awareness of the truth to which they pay lip-service, so that the truth may penetrate their feelings and acquire a real mastery over their conduct. no such difficulty is complained of while the creed is still fighting for its existence; at that stage even the weaker combatants know and feel what they are fighting for and how it differs from other doctrines. and at that same stage in any creed's existence, a good many people may be found who have brought its fundamental principles to bear on all the forms of thought, have weighed and considered them in all their important bearings, and have experienced the full effect on their characters which belief in that creed ought to produce in a mind thoroughly saturated with it. but when the creed has come to be hereditary, and to be accepted passively rather than actively when the mind is no longer as compelled as it once was to exercise its vital powers on the questions that its belief presents to it there's a progressive tendency to forget all of the belief except the words expressing it, or to give it a dull and lethargic assent, as though by taking it on trust one freed oneself from any need to make it real in one's mind, or to test it by personal experience; until it comes to have almost no connection with the person's inner life. then there are the cases, so frequent these days as almost to form the majority, in which the creed remains as it were outside the mind, like a hard shell protecting it against anything else that might be directed to the higher parts of our nature; manifesting its power by not letting any fresh and living conviction get in, but itself doing nothing for the mind or heart except standing guard over them to keep them vacant.

to what an extent doctrines intrinsically fitted to make the deepest impression upon the mind may remain in it as dead beliefs, without being ever realised in the imagination, the feelings, or the understanding, is exemplified by the manner in which the majority of believers hold the doctrines of christianity. by christianity i here mean what is accounted such by all churches and sects the maxims and precepts contained in the new testament. these are considered sacred, and accepted as laws, by all professing christians. yet it is scarcely too much to say that not one christian in a thousand guides or tests his individual conduct by reference to those laws. the standard to which he does refer it, is the custom of his nation, his class, or his religious profession. he has thus, on the one hand, a collection of ethical maxims, which he believes to have been vouchsafed to him by infallible wisdom as rules for his government; and on the other, a set of every-day judgments and practices, which go a certain length with some of those maxims, not so great a length with others, stand in direct opposition to some, and are, on the whole, a compromise between the christian creed and the interests and suggestions of worldly life. to the first of these standards he gives his homage; to the other his real allegiance. all christians believe that the blessed are the poor and humble, and those who are ill-used by the world; that it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven; that they should judge not, lest they be judged; that they should swear not at all; that they should love their neighbour as themselves; that if one take their cloak, they should give him their coat also; that they should take no thought for the morrow; that if they would be perfect, they should sell all that they have and give it to the poor. they are not insincere when they say that they believe these things. they do believe them, as people believe what they have always heard lauded and never discussed. but in the sense of that living belief which regulates conduct, they believe these doctrines just up to the point to which it is usual to act upon them. the doctrines in their integrity are serviceable to pelt adversaries with; and it is understood that they are to be put forward (when possible) as the reasons for whatever people do that they think laudable. but any one who reminded them that the maxims require an infinity of things which they never even think of doing, would gain nothing but to be classed among those very unpopular characters who affect to be better than other people. the doctrines have no hold on ordinary believers are not a power in their minds. they have a habitual respect for the sound of them, but no feeling which spreads from the words to the things signified, and forces the mind to take them in, and make them conform to the formula. whenever conduct is concerned, they look round for mr. a and b to direct them how far to go in obeying christ.
doctrines that are intrinsically fitted to make the deepest impression on the mind can remain in it as dead beliefs, without being ever becoming real in the imagination, the feelings, or the understanding; and an example of the extent to which this can happen is provided by the manner in which the majority of believers hold the doctrines of christianity. by christianity i here mean what is counted as such by all churches and sects the maxims and injunctions contained in the new testament. these are regarded as sacred and accepted as laws by all professing christians, and yet hardly one christian in a thousand guides or tests his individual conduct by reference to them. the standard to which he (the typical christian) does refer his conduct is the custom of his nation, his class, or the members of his church. so he has on one hand a collection of ethical maxims which he believes to have been delivered to him by infallible wisdom as rules for him to govern himself by, and on the other a set of everyday judgments and practices, which go a certain distance with some of those maxims, go a shorter distance with others, stand in direct opposition to some, and are at the bottom line a compromise between the christian creed and the interests and suggestions of worldly life. he pays lip-service to the first of these standards, but the one he actually steers by is the second. all christians believe that the blessed are the poor and humble and those who are ill-used by the world; that it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven; that they should not judge lest they be judged; that they should never swear; that they should love their neighbour as themselves; that if someone takes their cloak they should give him their coat also; that they should take no thought for what the next day will bring; that if they want to be perfect they should sell all their belongings and give the proceeds of the sale to the poor. they aren't insincere when they say they believe these things. they do believe them in the way that people believe what they have always heard praised and never heard discussed. but in the sense of belief that refers to the living belief that regulates conduct, they believe these doctrines up to the point where it is usual to act on them, and no further. the doctrines taken whole, as undivided lumps have two recognised uses: to throw at opponents, and to put forward (when possible) as the reasons for things people do that they think are praiseworthy. but if you reminded them (i.e. typical christians) that the maxims require an infinity of things that they never even think of doing, all you would achieve is being classified with those very unpopular characters who claim to be better than other people. the doctrines have no hold on ordinary believers they aren't a power in their minds. the believers have an habitual respect for the sound of them, but have no feeling that spreads from the words to the meanings, forcing the mind to take them in and make the believer's conduct conform to the formula. when it's a question of how to behave, the believer looks around for mr. a and mr. b to tell him how far to go in obeying christ.

now we may be well assured that the case was not thus, but far otherwise, with the early christians. had it been thus, christianity never would have expanded from an obscure sect of the despised hebrews into the religion of the roman empire. when their enemies said, see how these christians love one another (a remark not likely to be made by anybody now), they assuredly had a much livelier feeling of the meaning of their creed than they have ever had since. and to this cause, probably, it is chiefly owing that christianity now makes so little progress in extending its domain, and after eighteen centuries, is still nearly confined to europeans and the descendants of europeans. even with the strictly religious, who are much in earnest about their doctrines, and attach a greater amount of meaning to many of them than people in general, it commonly happens that the part which is thus comparatively active in their minds is that which was made by calvin, or knox, or some such person much nearer in character to themselves. the sayings of christ coexist passively in their minds, producing hardly any effect beyond what is caused by mere listening to words so amiable and bland. there are many reasons, doubtless, why doctrines which are the badge of a sect retain more of their vitality than those common to all recognised sects, and why more pains are taken by teachers to keep their meaning alive; but one reason certainly is, that the peculiar doctrines are more questioned, and have to be oftener defended against open gainsayers. both teachers and learners go to sleep at their post, as soon as there is no enemy in the field.
we can be sure that with the early christians the situation was very different from this. if it had then been the way it is now, christianity would never have expanded from an obscure sect of the despised hebrews into the religion of the roman empire. when their enemies said see how these christians love one another (a remark not likely to be made by anybody now), they assuredly had a much livelier sense of the meaning of their creed than they have ever had since. this lack of lively inner conviction on the part of most christians is probably the main reason why christianity now makes so little progress in extending its domain, and after eighteen centuries is still mostly confined to europeans and the descendants of europeans. even with strictly religious people who are much in earnest about their doctrines and attach much more meaning to them than do people in general, it commonly happens that this comparatively active religious component in their minds comes from calvin or knox or some such person much nearer in character to themselves. the sayings of christ sit passively in their minds, producing hardly any effect beyond what is caused by merely listening to such amiable and bland words. no doubt there are many reasons why doctrines that are the badge of one particular sect retain more of their vitality than do ones that are common to all recognized sects, and why teachers take more trouble to keep the meaning of the former alive; but one reason certainly is that a doctrine that is special to one particular sect is more questioned, and has to be oftener defended against open opponents. both teachers and learners go to sleep at their post when there is no enemy to be guarded against.

the same thing holds true, generally speaking, of all traditional doctrines those of prudence and knowledge of life, as well as of morals or religion. all languages and literatures are full of general observations on life, both as to what it is, and how to conduct oneself in it; observations which everybody knows, which everybody repeats, or hears with acquiescence, which are received as truisms, yet of which most people first truly learn the meaning, when experience, generally of a painful kind, has made it a reality to them. how often, when smarting under some unforeseen misfortune or disappointment, does a person call to mind some proverb or common saying, familiar to him all his life, the meaning of which, if he had ever before felt it as he does now, would have saved him from the calamity. there are indeed reasons for this, other than the absence of discussion: there are many truths of which the full meaning cannot be realised, until personal experience has brought it home. but much more of the meaning even of these would have been understood, and what was understood would have been far more deeply impressed on the mind, if the man had been accustomed to hear it argued pro and con by people who did understand it. the fatal tendency of mankind to leave off thinking about a thing when it is no longer doubtful, is the cause of half their errors. a contemporary author has well spoken of the deep slumber of a decided opinion.
the same thing holds true, generally speaking, of all traditional doctrines not just those of morals and religion, but also doctrines about what it is prudent to do and how to go about living your life. all languages and literatures are full of general observations on life what it is, and how to live it observations that everybody knows, that everybody repeats or hears and agrees to, that are accepted as truisms, but which most people don't really know the meaning of until experience, generally of a painful kind, makes it a reality to them. it often happens that someone suffering from an unforeseen misfortune or disappointment calls to mind some proverb or common saying that has been familiar to him all his life, and that would have saved him from the calamity if he had ever felt its meaning as he does now. there are indeed reasons for this other than the absence of discussion: there are many truths whose full meaning can't be realized made real in the mind until personal experience has brought it home. but even with these, much more of the meaning would have been understood, and what was understood would have been far more deeply impressed on the mind, if the man had been accustomed to hear it argued pro and con by people who did understand it. the fatal tendency of mankind to give up thinking about something when it is no longer doubtful is the cause of half their errors. a contemporary author has well spoken of the deep slumber of a decided opinion.

but what! (it may be asked) is the absence of unanimity an indispensable condition of true knowledge? is it necessary that some part of mankind should persist in error, to enable any to realise the truth? does a belief cease to be real and vital as soon as it is generally received and is a proposition never thoroughly understood and felt unless some doubt of it remains? as soon as mankind have unanimously accepted a truth, does the truth perish within them? the highest aim and best result of improved intelligence, it has hitherto been thought, is to unite mankind more and more in the acknowledgment of all important truths: and does the intelligence only last as long as it has not achieved its object? do the fruits of conquest perish by the very completeness of the victory?
is the absence of unanimity required for true knowledge? is it the case that for any part of mankind to realize the truth some other part must persist in error? does a belief stop being real and living as soon as it is generally accepted and is a proposition never thoroughly understood and felt unless some doubt about it remains? as soon as mankind have unanimously accepted a truth, does the truth perish within them? it has always been thought that the highest aim and best result of improved intelligence is to unite mankind increasingly in the acknowledgment of all important truths; does this intelligence last only as long as it hasn't achieved its aim? do the fruits of conquest perish because of the very completeness of the victory?

i affirm no such thing. as mankind improve, the number of doctrines which are no longer disputed or doubted will be constantly on the increase: and the well-being of mankind may almost be measured by the number and gravity of the truths which have reached the point of being uncontested. the cessation, on one question after another, of serious controversy, is one of the necessary incidents of the consolidation of opinion; a consolidation as salutary in the case of true opinions, as it is dangerous and noxious when the opinions are erroneous. but though this gradual narrowing of the bounds of diversity of opinion is necessary in both senses of the term, being at once inevitable and indispensable, we are not therefore obliged to conclude that all its consequences must be beneficial. the loss of so important an aid to the intelligent and living apprehension of a truth, as is afforded by the necessity of explaining it to, or defending it against, opponents, though not sufficient to outweigh, is no trifling drawback from, the benefit of its universal recognition. where this advantage can no longer be had, i confess i should like to see the teachers of mankind endeavouring to provide a substitute for it; some contrivance for making the difficulties of the question as present to the learner's consciousness, as if they were pressed upon him by a dissentient champion, eager for his conversion.
i affirm no such thing. as mankind improve, the number of doctrines that are no longer disputed or doubted will be constantly on the increase; and the well-being of mankind could almost be measured by the number and importance of the truths that have reached the point of being uncontested. the ending of serious controversy on one question after another is a necessary aspect of the consolidation of opinion; and such consolidation is as healthy in the case of true opinions as it is dangerous and poisonous when the opinions are wrong. but although this gradual lessening of the area of diversity of opinion is necessary in both senses of the term being at once inevitable and absolutely needed it doesn't follow that all its consequences are beneficial. the need to explain a truth to its opponents or to defend it against them is an important aid to the intelligent and living grasp of it; and the loss of that aid is a disadvantage in its being universally recognized and thus having no opponents. it isn't enough to outweigh the benefit of universal recognition of a truth, but still it's a real drawback. where this advantage can no longer be had, i would like to see the teachers of mankind trying to provide a substitute for it some device for making the difficulties of the question as vivid in the learner's consciousness as if they were being urged by someone trying hard to convert him to an opposing position.

but instead of seeking contrivances for this purpose, they have lost those they formerly had. the socratic dialectics, so magnificently exemplified in the dialogues of plato, were a contrivance of this description. they were essentially a negative discussion of the great questions of philosophy and life, directed with consummate skill to the purpose of convincing any one who had merely adopted the commonplaces of received opinion, that he did not understand the subject that he as yet attached no definite meaning to the doctrines he professed; in order that, becoming aware of his ignorance, he might be put in the way to attain a stable belief, resting on a clear apprehension both of the meaning of doctrines and of their evidence. the school disputations of the middle ages had a somewhat similar object. they were intended to make sure that the pupil understood his own opinion, and (by necessary correlation) the opinion opposed to it, and could enforce the grounds of the one and confute those of the other. these last-mentioned contests had indeed the incurable defect, that the premises appealed to were taken from authority, not from reason; and, as a discipline to the mind, they were in every respect inferior to the powerful dialectics which formed the intellects of the socratici viri: but the modern mind owes far more to both than it is generally willing to admit, and the present modes of education contain nothing which in the smallest degree supplies the place either of the one or of the other. a person who derives all his instruction from teachers or books, even if he escape the besetting temptation of contenting himself with cram, is under no compulsion to hear both sides; accordingly it is far from a frequent accomplishment, even among thinkers, to know both sides; and the weakest part of what everybody says in defence of his opinion, is what he intends as a reply to antagonists. it is the fashion of the present time to disparage negative logic that which points out weaknesses in theory or errors in practice, without establishing positive truths. such negative criticism would indeed be poor enough as an ultimate result; but as a means to attaining any positive knowledge or conviction worthy the name, it cannot be valued too highly; and until people are again systematically trained to it, there will be few great thinkers, and a low general average of intellect, in any but the mathematical and physical departments of speculation. on any other subject no one's opinions deserve the name of knowledge, except so far as he has either had forced upon him by others, or gone through of himself, the same mental process which would have been required of him in carrying on an active controversy with opponents. that, therefore, which when absent, it is so indispensable, but so difficult, to create, how worse than absurd is it to forego, when spontaneously offering itself! if there are any persons who contest a received opinion, or who will do so if law or opinion will let them, let us thank them for it, open our minds to listen to them, and rejoice that there is some one to do for us what we otherwise ought, if we have any regard for either the certainty or the vitality of our convictions, to do with much greater labour for ourselves.
but instead of looking for ways to do this, the teachers have lost the instructive devices they formerly had. the socratic dialectics, is under no compulsion to hear both sides; with the result that it is quite unusual, even among thinkers, for someone to know both sides; and the weakest part of what everybody says in defence of his own opinion is what he has prepared as a reply to opponents. it is currently fashionable to belittle negative logic the kind that points out weaknesses in theory or errors in practice, without establishing positive truths. such negative criticism would indeed be a pretty poor final result, but as a means to attaining any positive knowledge or belief worthy of the name it is enormously valuable; and until people are again systematically trained in it there will be few great thinkers, and a low average level of intellect, in all branches of learning and research except mathematics and the physical sciences. on any other subject a person's opinions deserve the name of knowledge only to the extent that he has either on his own initiative or forced to it by others gone through the same mental process that would have been required of him in carrying on an active controversy with opponents. when we don't have controversy, it is sorely missed and difficult to create artificially; so how absurd it is how worse than absurd to deprive oneself of it when it occurs spontaneously! if there are people who dispute a publicly accepted opinion, or who will dispute it if not prevented by law or social pressure, let us thank them for it, open our minds to listen to them, and rejoice that someone will do for us what we otherwise would have to do for ourselves, with much greater labour. (or, anyway, what we otherwise ought to do if we have any regard for the certainty or the vitality of our convictions.)

it still remains to speak of one of the principal causes which make diversity of opinion advantageous, and will continue to do so until mankind shall have entered a stage of intellectual advancement which at present seems at an incalculable distance. we have hitherto considered only two possibilities: that the received opinion may be false, and some other opinion, consequently, true; or that, the received opinion being true, a conflict with the opposite error is essential to a clear apprehension and deep feeling of its truth. but there is a commoner case than either of these; when the conflicting doctrines, instead of being one true and the other false, share the truth between them; and the nonconforming opinion is needed to supply the remainder of the truth, of which the received doctrine embodies only a part. popular opinions, on subjects not palpable to sense, are often true, but seldom or never the whole truth. they are a part of the truth; sometimes a greater, sometimes a smaller part, but exaggerated, distorted, and disjoined from the truths by which they ought to be accompanied and limited. heretical opinions, on the other hand, are generally some of these suppressed and neglected truths, bursting the bonds which kept them down, and either seeking reconciliation with the truth contained in the common opinion, or fronting it as enemies, and setting themselves up, with similar exclusiveness, as the whole truth. the latter case is hitherto the most frequent, as, in the human mind, one-sidedness has always been the rule, and many-sidedness the exception. hence, even in revolutions of opinion, one part of the truth usually sets while another rises. even progress, which ought to superadd, for the most part only substitutes one partial and incomplete truth for another; improvement consisting chiefly in this, that the new fragment of truth is more wanted, more adapted to the needs of the time, than that which it displaces. such being the partial character of prevailing opinions, even when resting on a true foundation; every opinion which embodies somewhat of the portion of truth which the common opinion omits, ought to be considered precious, with whatever amount of error and confusion that truth may be blended. no sober judge of human affairs will feel bound to be indignant because those who force on our notice truths which we should otherwise have overlooked, overlook some of those which we see. rather, he will think that so long as popular truth is one-sided, it is more desirable than otherwise that unpopular truth should have one-sided asserters too; such being usually the most energetic, and the most likely to compel reluctant attention to the fragment of wisdom which they proclaim as if it were the whole.
there is yet another powerful reason why diversity of opinion can be advantageous a reason that will hold good until mankind advances to an intellectual level that at present seems incalculably far off. we have so far considered only two possibilities: that the publicly accepted opinion is false, and therefore some other opinion is true; and that the publicly accepted opinion is true, but a conflict with the opposite error is essential to a clear grasp and deep feeling of its truth. however, there is a commoner case than either of these, namely: the conflicting doctrines share the truth between them, and the minority opinion is needed to provide the remainder of the truth, of which the publicly accepted doctrine captures only a part. on matters other than plain empirical fact, popular opinions are often true but are seldom or never the whole truth. they are a part of the truth sometimes a large part, sometimes a small but exaggerated, distorted, and torn apart from other truths that ought to accompany them and set limits to them. minority opinions, on the other hand, are generally some of these suppressed and neglected truths, bursting the bonds that kept them down and either seeking reconciliation with the truth contained in the common opinion or confronting it as enemies and setting themselves up as the whole truth. the latter case has always been the most frequent, because in the human mind one-sidedness has always been the rule and many-sidedness the exception. hence, even in revolutions of opinion one part of the truth usually sets while another rises. even progress, which ought to add truth to truth, usually only substitutes one partial and incomplete truth for another; and any improvement this brings comes mainly from the fact that the new fragment of truth is more wanted, better suited to the needs of the time, than was the one it displaces. even when a prevailing opinion is basically true, it will be so partial that every rival opinion that embodies some part of the truth that the other omits ought to be considered precious, no matter how much error and confusion it blends in with its portion of truth. no reasonable person will be indignant because those who force on our notice truths that we would otherwise have overlooked do themselves overlook some of the truths that we see. rather, a reasonable person will think that so long as popular truth is one-sided, it is more desirable than regrettable that unpopular truth should have one-sided defenders too, because they the one-sided ones are usually the most energetic and the most likely to compel reluctant attention to the fragment of wisdom that they proclaim as if it were the whole.

thus, in the eighteenth century, when nearly all the instructed, and all those of the uninstructed who were led by them, were lost in admiration of what is called civilisation, and of the marvels of modern science, literature, and philosophy, and while greatly overrating the amount of unlikeness between the men of modern and those of ancient times, indulged the belief that the whole of the difference was in their own favour; with what a salutary shock did the paradoxes of rousseau explode like bombshells in the midst, dislocating the compact mass of one-sided opinion, and forcing its elements to recombine in a better form and with additional ingredients. not that the current opinions were on the whole farther from the truth than rousseau's were; on the contrary, they were nearer to it; they contained more of positive truth, and very much less of error. nevertheless there lay in rousseau's doctrine, and has floated down the stream of opinion along with it, a considerable amount of exactly those truths which the popular opinion wanted; and these are the deposit which was left behind when the flood subsided. the superior worth of simplicity of life, the enervating and demoralising effect of the trammels and hypocrisies of artificial society, are ideas which have never been entirely absent from cultivated minds since rousseau wrote; and they will in time produce their due effect, though at present needing to be asserted as much as ever, and to be asserted by deeds, for words, on this subject, have nearly exhausted their power.
nearly all educated people and all the uneducated people who were led by them were lost in admiration of what is called civilization, and of the marvels of modern science, literature, and philosophy. greatly exaggerating the unlikeness between the men of modern times and those of ancient times, they cherished the belief that the differences were entirely in their favour. what a salutary shock they received when the paradoxes of rousseau exploded like bombshells in their midst! rousseau's views broke up the compact mass of one-sided opinion, and forced its elements to recombine in a better form and with additional ingredients. it's not that the generally accepted opinions were on the whole further from the truth than rousseau's were; on the contrary, they were nearer to it, containing more positive truth and very much less error. nevertheless rousseau's doctrine contained a considerable amount of exactly those truths that were lacking from the general opinion; these truths floated down the stream of opinion, and are the deposit that was left behind when the flood subsided. the superior worth of simplicity of life, the enervating and demoralizing effect of the constraints and clutter and hypocrisies of artificial society, are ideas that have never been entirely absent from cultivated minds since rousseau wrote; and in time they will produce their due effect, though at present they have as much need to be asserted as they ever did and asserted by deeds, because words on this subject have nearly exhausted their power.

in politics, again, it is almost a commonplace, that a party of order or stability, and a party of progress or reform, are both necessary elements of a healthy state of political life; until the one or the other shall have so enlarged its mental grasp as to be a party equally of order and of progress, knowing and distinguishing what is fit to be preserved from what ought to be swept away. each of these modes of thinking derives its utility from the deficiencies of the other; but it is in a great measure the opposition of the other that keeps each within the limits of reason and sanity. unless opinions favourable to democracy and to aristocracy, to property and to equality, to co-operation and to competition, to luxury and to abstinence, to sociality and individuality, to liberty and discipline, and all the other standing antagonisms of practical life, are expressed with equal freedom, and enforced and defended with equal talent and energy, there is no chance of both elements obtaining their due; one scale is sure to go up and the other down. truth, in the great practical concerns of life, is so much a question of the reconciling and combining of opposites, that very few have minds sufficiently capacious and impartial to make the adjustment with an approach to correctness, and it has to be made by the rough process of a struggle between combatants fighting under hostile banners. on any of the great open questions just enumerated, if either of the two opinions has a better claim than the other, not merely to be tolerated, but to be encouraged and countenanced, it is the one which happens at the particular time and place to be in a minority. that is the opinion which, for the time being, represents the neglected interests, the side of human well-being which is in danger of obtaining less than its share. i am aware that there is not, in this country, any intolerance of differences of opinion on most of these topics. they are adduced to show, by admitted and multiplied examples, the universality of the fact, that only through diversity of opinion is there, in the existing state of human intellect, a chance of fair-play to all sides of the truth. when there are persons to be found, who form an exception to the apparent unanimity of the world on any subject, even if the world is in the right, it is always probable that dissentients have something worth hearing to say for themselves, and that truth would lose something by their silence.
another example: in politics it is almost a commonplace that a healthy state of political life requires that there be a party of order or stability and a party of progress or reform, until one or other of them enlarges its mental grasp enough to become a party equally of order and of progress, knowing what is fit to be preserved and what ought to be swept away. each of these ways of thinking gets its usefulness from the deficiencies of the other, but also to a great extent is kept sane and reasonable by the opposition of the other. consider the standing antagonisms of practical life, including: democracy vs. aristocracy, property vs. equality, co-operation vs. competition, luxury vs. abstinence, sociality vs. individuality, liberty vs. discipline, and so on. unless opinions favourable to each side of each of these are expressed with equal freedom and pressed and defended with equal talent and energy, there is no chance of both the conflicting elements obtaining their due; one scale is sure to go up and the other down. in the great practical concerns of life, truth is very much a matter of reconciling and combining opposites so much so that few people have minds that are capacious and impartial enough to make the adjustment anything like correctly, so that it has to be made by the rough process of a struggle between combatants fighting under hostile banners. with any of the great open questions i have listed, if either of the two rival opinions has a better claim than the other to be (not merely tolerated but) encouraged and countenanced, it is the one that happens to be the minority opinion at a given time and place. that is the one that for the time being represents the neglected interests, the aspect of human well-being that is in danger of obtaining less than its share. i am aware that in this country now there is no intolerance of differences of opinion on most of these topics. i bring them forward just as unquestionable examples of the universal fact that in the existing state of the human intellect the only chance of fair play for all sides of the truth is through diversity of opinion. even when the world is almost unanimous on some subject and is right about it, people who disagree if there are any to be found probably have something to say for themselves that is worth hearing, and truth would lose something by their silence.

it may be objected, but some received principles, especially on the highest and most vital subjects, are more than half-truths. the christian morality, for instance, is the whole truth on that subject, and if any one teaches a morality which varies from it, he is wholly in error. as this is of all cases the most important in practice, none can be fitter to test the general maxim. but before pronouncing what christian morality is or is not, it would be desirable to decide what is meant by christian morality. if it means the morality of the new testament, i wonder that any one who derives his knowledge of this from the book itself, can suppose that it was announced, or intended, as a complete doctrine of morals. the gospel always refers to a pre-existing morality, and confines its precepts to the particulars in which that morality was to be corrected, or superseded by a wider and higher; expressing itself, moreover, in terms most general, often impossible to be interpreted literally, and possessing rather the impressiveness of poetry or eloquence than the precision of legislation. to extract from it a body of ethical doctrine, has ever been possible without eking it out from the old testament, that is, from a system elaborate indeed, but in many respects barbarous, and intended only for a barbarous people. st. paul, a declared enemy to this judaical mode of interpreting the doctrine and filling up the scheme of his master, equally assumes a pre-existing morality, namely, that of the greeks and romans; and his advice to christians is in a great measure a system of accommodation to that; even to the extent of giving an apparent sanction to slavery. what is called christian, but should rather be termed theological, morality, was not the work of christ or the apostles, but is of much later origin, having been gradually built up by the catholic church of the first five centuries, and though not implicitly adopted by moderns and protestants, has been much less modified by them than might have been expected. for the most part, indeed, they have contented themselves with cutting off the additions which had been made to it in the middle ages, each sect supplying the place by fresh additions, adapted to its own character and tendencies. that mankind owe a great debt to this morality, and to its early teachers, i should be the last person to deny; but i do not scruple to say of it, that it is, in many important points, incomplete and one-sided, and that unless ideas and feelings, not sanctioned by it, had contributed to the formation of european life and character, human affairs would have been in a worse condition than they now are. christian morality (so called) has all the characters of a reaction; it is, in great part, a protest against paganism. its ideal is negative rather than positive; passive rather than active; innocence rather than nobleness; abstinence from evil, rather than energetic pursuit of good: in its precepts (as has been well said) thou shalt not predominates unduly over thou shalt. in its horror of sensuality, it made an idol of asceticism, which has been gradually compromised away into one of legality. it holds out the hope of heaven and the threat of hell, as the appointed and appropriate motives to a virtuous life: in this falling far below the best of the ancients, and doing what lies in it to give to human morality an essentially selfish character, by disconnecting each man's feelings of duty from the interests of his fellow-creatures, except so far as a self-interested inducement is offered to him for consulting them. it is essentially a doctrine of passive obedience; it inculcates submission to all authorities found established; who indeed are not to be actively obeyed when they command what religion forbids, but who are not to be resisted, far less rebelled against, for any amount of wrong to ourselves. and while, in the morality of the best pagan nations, duty to the state holds even a disproportionate place, infringing on the just liberty of the individual; in purely christian ethics, that grand department of duty is scarcely noticed or acknowledged. it is in the koran, not the new testament, that we read the maxim a ruler who appoints any man to an office, when there is in his dominions another man better qualified for it, sins against god and against the state. what little recognition the idea of obligation to the public obtains in modern morality, is derived from greek and roman sources, not from christian; as, even in the morality of private life, whatever exists of magnanimity, high-mindedness, personal dignity, even the sense of honour, is derived from the purely human, not the religious part of our education, and never could have grown out of a standard of ethics in which the only worth, professedly recognised, is that of obedience.
but some publicly accepted principles, especially on the highest and most vital subjects, are more than half-truths. christian morality, for instance, is the whole truth on that subject and anyone who teaches a morality that varies from it is wholly in error. this is in practice the most important of all the cases, so none can be better for testing the general maxim. but before pronouncing on what christian morality is or is not, it would be desirable to decide what christian morality means. if it means the morality of the new testament, i am surprised that anyone who knows about it from the book itself can suppose that it was announced or intended as a complete doctrine of morals. the gospel always refers to a pre-existing morality, and confines its precepts to matters in respect of which that morality was to be corrected or superseded by a wider and higher one. also, these precepts are expressed in extremely general terms, and often can't possibly be interpreted literally; they have the impressiveness of poetry or eloquence rather than the precision of legislation. it has never been possible to extract a body of ethical doctrine from this without eking it out from the old testament, that is, from a system that is elaborate enough but in many respects barbarous, and intended only for a barbarous people. st. paul, a declared enemy to this judaic mode of interpreting the doctrine of his master and of filling in the gaps in it, also assumes a pre-existing morality but a different one, namely that of the greeks and romans; and his advice to christians is largely a system of coming to terms with that, even to the extent of seeming to endorse slavery. what is called christian morality, but should rather be termed theological morality, was not the work of christ or the apostles, but is of much later origin. it was gradually built up by the catholic church of the first five centuries, and though moderns and protestants don't automatically accept it as authoritative, they have modified it much less than might have been expected. for the most part, indeed, they have contented themselves with cutting off the parts that had been added to it in the middle ages and replacing those by fresh additions selected according to the character and tendencies of the sect in question. i would be the last person to deny that mankind owes a great debt to this morality and to its early teachers; but i don't hesitate to say that in many important respects it is incomplete and one-sided, and that human affairs would have been in a worse condition than they now are if it hadn't been that ideas and feelings from outside this morality contributed to the formation of european life and character. christian morality (so called) has all the marks of a reaction; it is to a large extent protest against paganism. its ideal is innocence rather than nobleness, and abstinence from evil rather than energetic pursuit of good.

i am as far as any one from pretending that these defects are necessarily inherent in the christian ethics, in every manner in which it can be conceived, or that the many requisites of a complete moral doctrine which it does not contain, do not admit of being reconciled with it. far less would i insinuate this of the doctrines and precepts of christ himself. i believe that the sayings of christ are all, that i can see any evidence of their having been intended to be; that they are irreconcilable with nothing which a comprehensive morality requires; that everything which is excellent in ethics may be brought within them, with no greater violence to their language than has been done to it by all who have attempted to deduce from them any practical system of conduct whatever. but it is quite consistent with this, to believe that they contain, and were meant to contain, only a part of the truth; that many essential elements of the highest morality are among the things which are not provided for, nor intended to be provided for, in the recorded deliverances of the founder of christianity, and which have been entirely thrown aside in the system of ethics erected on the basis of those deliverances by the christian church. and this being so, i think it a great error to persist in attempting to find in the christian doctrine that complete rule for our guidance, which its author intended it to sanction and enforce, but only partially to provide. i believe, too, that this narrow theory is becoming a grave practical evil, detracting greatly from the value of the moral training and instruction, which so many well-meaning persons are now at length exerting themselves to promote. i much fear that by attempting to form the mind and feelings on an exclusively religious type, and discarding those secular standards (as for want of a better name they may be called) which heretofore co-existed with and supplemented the christian ethics, receiving some of its spirit, and infusing into it some of theirs, there will result, and is even now resulting, a low, abject, servile type of character, which, submit itself as it may to what it deems the supreme will, is incapable of rising to or sympathising in the conception of supreme goodness. i believe that other ethics than any which can be evolved from exclusively christian sources, must exist side by side with christian ethics to produce the moral regeneration of mankind; and that the christian system is no exception to the rule, that in an imperfect state of the human mind, the interests of truth require a diversity of opinions. it is not necessary that in ceasing to ignore the moral truths not contained in christianity, men should ignore any of those which it does contain. such prejudice, or oversight, when it occurs, is altogether an evil; but it is one from which we cannot hope to be always exempt, and must be regarded as the price paid for an inestimable good. the exclusive pretension made by a part of the truth to be the whole, must and ought to be protested against, and if a reactionary impulse should make the protestors unjust in their turn, this one-sidedness, like the other, may be lamented, but must be tolerated. if christians would teach infidels to be just to christianity, they should themselves be just to infidelity. it can do truth no service to blink the fact, known to all who have the most ordinary acquaintance with literary history, that a large portion of the noblest and most valuable moral teaching has been the work, not only of men who did not know, but of men who knew and rejected, the christian faith.
i fully concede that there could be forms of christian ethics that were free of these defects, and that christian ethics could be made consistent with the many requisites of a complete moral doctrine that it doesn't actually contain. and i would say this even more strenuously about the doctrines and precepts of christ himself. i believe that the sayings of christ are everything they were apparently intended to be; that they can be reconciled with anything that a comprehensive morality requires; that everything that is excellent in ethics can be brought within their scope with no more violence to their language than has been done to it by all who have tried to deduce from them any practical system of conduct whatever. but it is quite consistent with this to believe that the sayings of christ contain only a part of the truth and weren't meant to contain more; that many essential elements of the highest morality aren't provided for (or intended to be provided for) in the recorded sayings of the founder of christianity, and have been entirely thrown aside in the system of ethics that the christian church has erected on the basis of those sayings. so i think it a great error to persist in trying to find in christian doctrine the complete rule for our guidance which its author intended that doctrine to endorse and enforce but only partially to provide. i also believe that this narrow theory is becoming a grave practical evil, detracting greatly from the value of the moral training and instruction that so many well-meaning people are now at last working to promote. these people try to form minds on an exclusively religious pattern, discarding those non-religious standards that used to coexist with and supplement christian ethics, receiving some of its spirit and giving it some of theirs. i greatly fear that this will result that it is now resulting in a low, abject, servile type of character, one that may submit itself to what it thinks is the supreme will but can't rise to or feel for the conception of supreme goodness. the moral regeneration of mankind, i believe, will require that christian ethics exist side by side with other ethical principles that can't be developed from exclusively christian sources. the christian system is no exception to the rule that in an imperfect state of the human mind the interests of truth require a diversity of opinions. it isn't necessary that in starting to attend to moral truths not contained in christianity men should ignore any of the ones it does contain. such prejudice or oversight, when it occurs, is altogether bad. still, we can't hope to avoid it altogether, and it must be regarded as the price to be paid for an incalculable good. when one part of the truth is claimed to be the whole of it, this must and ought to be protested against; and if the protestors sense of the unfairness of this makes them unjust in their turn, this one-sidedness may be lamented just as the other was. but it must be tolerated. if christians want to teach unbelievers to be fair to christianity, they should themselves be fair to unbelief. much of the noblest and most valuable moral teaching has been the work not only of men who didn't know the christian faith but also of men who knew and rejected it; anyone who has the most ordinary acquaintance with literary history knows this; running away from it can't do the truth any service.

i do not pretend that the most unlimited use of the freedom of enunciating all possible opinions would put an end to the evils of religious or philosophical sectarianism. every truth which men of narrow capacity are in earnest about, is sure to be asserted, inculcated, and in many ways even acted on, as if no other truth existed in the world, or at all events none that could limit or qualify the first. i acknowledge that the tendency of all opinions to become sectarian is not cured by the freest discussion, but is often heightened and exacerbated thereby; the truth which ought to have been, but was not, seen, being rejected all the more violently because proclaimed by persons regarded as opponents. but it is not on the impassioned partisan, it is on the calmer and more disinterested bystander, that this collision of opinions works its salutary effect. not the violent conflict between parts of the truth, but the quiet suppression of half of it, is the formidable evil: there is always hope when people are forced to listen to both sides; it is when they attend only to one that errors harden into prejudices, and truth itself ceases to have the effect of truth, by being exaggerated into falsehood. and since there are few mental attributes more rare than that judicial faculty which can sit in intelligent judgment between two sides of a question, of which only one is represented by an advocate before it, truth has no chance but in proportion as every side of it, every opinion which embodies any fraction of the truth, not only finds advocates, but is so advocated as to be listened to.
i don't claim that the most unlimited use of freedom in expressing all possible opinions would put an end to the evils of religious or philosophical sectarianism. every truth that men with limited minds are in earnest about is sure to be asserted, taught, and in many ways even acted on as if no other truth existed in the world, or anyway none that could limit or restrict the first. all opinions tend to become sectarian, and i admit that very free discussion is not a cure for this. indeed, discussion heightens and worsens sectarianism; truth that ought to be seen may be rejected all the more violently because it is proclaimed by people regarded by the sectarians as opponents. but it is not on the impassioned partisan, but rather on the calmer and more disinterested bystander, that this collision of opinions has a healthy effect. the really threatening evil is not the violent conflict between parts of the truth, but the quiet suppression of half of it. when people are forced to listen to both sides, there are grounds for hope; it's when they attend to only one side that errors harden into prejudices, and truth itself stops acting like truth because it comes to be exaggerated into falsehood. very few people have the mental capacity to sit in intelligent judgment between two sides of a question, of which only one is represented by an advocate.

we have now recognised the necessity to the mental well-being of mankind (on which all their other well-being depends) of freedom of opinion, and freedom of the expression of opinion, on four distinct grounds; which we will now briefly recapitulate. first, if any opinion is compelled to silence, that opinion may, for aught we can certainly know, be true. to deny this is to assume our own infallibility. secondly, though the silenced opinion be an error, it may, and very commonly does, contain a portion of truth; and since the general or prevailing opinion on any subject is rarely or never the whole truth, it is only by the collision of adverse opinions, that the remainder of the truth has any chance of being supplied. thirdly, even if the received opinion be not only true, but the whole truth; unless it is suffered to be, and actually is, vigorously and earnestly contested, it will, by most of those who receive it, be held in the manner of a prejudice, with little comprehension or feeling of its rational grounds. and not only this, but, fourthly, the meaning of the doctrine itself will be in danger of being lost, or enfeebled, and deprived of its vital effect on the character and conduct: the dogma becoming a mere formal profession, inefficacious for good, but cumbering the ground, and preventing the growth of any real and heartfelt conviction, from reason or personal experience.
i have argued that freedom of opinion, and freedom of the expression of opinion, are needed for the mental well-being of mankind (on which all other kinds of well-being depend). i now briefly repeat my four distinct reasons for this view. 1 an opinion that is compelled to silence may, for all we can certainly know, be true. to deny this is to assume our own infallibility. 2 even when the silenced opinion is an error, it can and very commonly does contain a portion of the truth; and since the general or prevailing opinion on any topic is rarely if ever the whole truth about it, it is only through the collision of conflicting opinions that the remainder of the truth has any chance of being supplied. thirdly, even if the publicly accepted opinion is not only true but is the whole truth on the subject in question, unless it is vigorously and earnestly disputed most of those who accept it will have it in the manner merely of a prejudice, with little grasp or sense of what its rational grounds are. and also (this being my fourth argument), the meaning of the doctrine itself will be in danger of being lost or weakened, and deprived of its vital effect on character and conduct. it will become a mere formal pronouncement, effective not in doing any good but only in cluttering up the ground and preventing the growth of any real and heartfelt conviction from reason or personal experience.

before quitting the subject of freedom of opinion, it is fit to take some notice of those who say, that the free expression of all opinions should be permitted, on condition that the manner be temperate, and do not pass the bounds of fair discussion. much might be said on the impossibility of fixing where these supposed bounds are to be placed; for if the test be offence to those whose opinion is attacked, i think experience testifies that this offence is given whenever the attack is telling and powerful, and that every opponent who pushes them hard, and whom they find it difficult to answer, appears to them, if he shows any strong feeling on the subject, an intemperate opponent. but this, though an important consideration in a practical point of view, merges in a more fundamental objection. undoubtedly the manner of asserting an opinion, even though it be a true one, may be very objectionable, and may justly incur severe censure. but the principal offences of the kind are such as it is mostly impossible, unless by accidental self-betrayal, to bring home to conviction. the gravest of them is, to argue sophistically, to suppress facts or arguments, to misstate the elements of the case, or misrepresent the opposite opinion. but all this, even to the most aggravated degree, is so continually done in perfect good faith, by persons who are not considered, and in many other respects may not deserve to be considered, ignorant or incompetent, that it is rarely possible on adequate grounds conscientiously to stamp the misrepresentation as morally culpable; and still less could law presume to interfere with this kind of controversial misconduct. with regard to what is commonly meant by intemperate discussion, namely invective, sarcasm, personality, and the like, the denunciation of these weapons would deserve more sympathy if it were ever proposed to interdict them equally to both sides; but it is only desired to restrain the employment of them against the prevailing opinion: against the unprevailing they may not only be used without general disapproval, but will be likely to obtain for him who uses them the praise of honest zeal and righteous indignation. yet whatever mischief arises from their use, is greatest when they are employed against the comparatively defenceless; and whatever unfair advantage can be derived by any opinion from this mode of asserting it, accrues almost exclusively to received opinions. the worst offence of this kind which can be committed by a polemic, is to stigmatise those who hold the contrary opinion as bad and immoral men. to calumny of this sort, those who hold any unpopular opinion are peculiarly exposed, because they are in general few and uninfluential, and nobody but themselves feel much interest in seeing justice done them; but this weapon is, from the nature of the case, denied to those who attack a prevailing opinion: they can neither use it with safety to themselves, nor, if they could, would it do anything but recoil on their own cause. in general, opinions contrary to those commonly received can only obtain a hearing by studied moderation of language, and the most cautious avoidance of unnecessary offence, from which they hardly ever deviate even in a slight degree without losing ground: while unmeasured vituperation employed on the side of the prevailing opinion, really does deter people from professing contrary opinions, and from listening to those who profess them. for the interest, therefore, of truth and justice, it is far more important to restrain this employment of vituperative language than the other; and, for example, if it were necessary to choose, there would be much more need to discourage offensive attacks on infidelity, than on religion. it is, however, obvious that law and authority have no business with restraining either, while opinion ought, in every instance, to determine its verdict by the circumstances of the individual case; condemning every one, on whichever side of the argument he places himself, in whose mode of advocacy either want of candour, or malignity, bigotry, or intolerance of feeling manifest themselves; but not inferring these vices from the side which a person takes, though it be the contrary side of the question to our own: and giving merited honour to every one, whatever opinion he may hold, who has calmness to see and honesty to state what his opponents and their opinions really are, exaggerating nothing to their discredit, keeping nothing back which tells, or can be supposed to tell, in their favour. this is the real morality of public discussion; and if often violated, i am happy to think that there are many controversialists who to a great extent observe it, and a still greater number who conscientiously strive towards it.
before leaving the topic of freedom of opinion, i should discuss the view that the free expression of all opinions should be permitted on condition that the expression is temperate and doesn't exceed the bounds of fair discussion. how are these supposed bounds to be fixed? is the criterion that the bounds have been passed if those whose opinion is attacked are offended? that would be useless, because experience shows that offence is given whenever the attack is telling and powerful, and that every opponent who pushes them hard and whom they find it difficult to answer appears to them (if he shows any strong feeling on the subject) to be an intemperate opponent. this fixing of the boundaries to temperateness could be discussed at length, and it is an important consideration from a practical point of view; but i shan't pursue it any further on its own, because it merges into a more fundamental objection to the demand for temperateness in debate. undoubtedly the manner of asserting an opinion, even a true one, may be very objectionable and may rightly be severely criticized. but the principal offences of this kind i.e. offences in the manner of conducting a debate are such that it is usually impossible to convict the offender unless he accidentally gives himself away. the most serious of them is to argue invalidly, to suppress facts or arguments, to misstate the elements of the case, or misrepresent the opposite opinion. but all this is continually done often to an extreme in perfect good faith by people who aren't regarded as ignorant or incompetent (and in many other respects may not be ignorant or incompetent); so that there are seldom adequate grounds for a conscientious accusation of morally culpable misrepresentation; and still less could the law presume to interfere with this kind of misconduct in controversy. as for what is commonly meant by intemperate discussion, namely invective, sarcasm, personal insults, and the like: the denunciation of these weapons of debate would deserve more sympathy if it were ever proposed to forbid them equally to both sides; but in practice it is desired to restrain the use of them only against the prevailing opinion. against the unprevailing opinion they may not only be used without general disapproval but will be likely to lead to the person's being praised for his honest zeal and righteous indignation. yet the harm that is done by these weapons of debate is greatest when they are used against the comparatively defenceless; and whatever unfair advantage an opinion can get from being defended in this way goes almost exclusively to publicly accepted opinions. the worst offence of this kind that can be committed by a controversialist is to brand those who hold the contrary opinion as bad and immoral men. those who hold some unpopular opinion are especially vulnerable to slander of this sort, because usually they are few and uninfluential, and nobody else feels much interest in seeing justice done to them. but from the nature of the case they can't use this weapon against defenders of a prevailing opinion: it wouldn't be safe for them to use it, and anyway it wouldn't achieve anything for them and would merely reflect back on their own cause. in general, opinions contrary to those that are commonly accepted can obtain a hearing only by carefully moderate language and the most cautious avoidance of unnecessary offence, from which they hardly ever deviate even slightly without losing ground; whereas unmeasured abuse employed on the side of the prevailing opinion really does deter people from proclaiming contrary opinions and from listening to those who proclaim them. in the interests of truth and justice, therefore, it is far more important to restrain this employment of abusive language than the other; for example, if we had to choose, there would be much more need to discourage offensive attacks on unbelief than offensive attacks on religion. but it is obvious that law and authority have no business restraining either of them. and here is what opinion should do, i.e. what we should all do. we ought to base our verdict on the circumstances of the individual case, condemning anyone on either side of the argument whose mode of advocacy shows lack of candour, or malignity, bigotry or intolerance of feeling. but we shouldn't infer these vices from the side that a person takes in the debate, even if it is the opposite side to our own. and we should give deserved honour to everyone, whatever opinion he may hold, who has the calmness to see and the honesty to state what his opponents and their opinions really are, exaggerating nothing to their discredit and keeping back nothing that might be thought to count in their favour. this is the real morality of public discussion; and even if it is often violated, i am happy to think that there are many controversialists who to a great extent observe it and even more who conscientiously try to do so.

footnotes: these words had scarcely been written, when, as if to give them an emphatic contradiction, occurred the government press prosecutions of 1858. that ill-judged interference with the liberty of public discussion has not, however, induced me to alter a single word in the text, nor has it at all weakened my conviction that, moments of panic excepted, the era of pains and penalties for political discussion has, in our own country, passed away. for, in the first place, the prosecutions were not persisted in; and, in the second, they were never, properly speaking, political prosecutions. the offence charged was not that of criticising institutions, or the acts or persons of rulers, but of circulating what was deemed an immoral doctrine, the lawfulness of tyrannicide.
these words had hardly been written when the government's press prosecutions of 1858 took place as though intended to emphatically contradict me. still, that ill-judged interference with the liberty of public discussion hasn't induced me to alter a single word in the text, nor has it at all weakened my conviction that except in moments of panic the era of pains and penalties for political discussion has in our own country passed away. for one thing, the prosecutions were not persisted in; for another, they were never strictly speaking political prosecutions. the offence charged was not that of criticizing institutions or rulers or their acts, but rather of circulating what was deemed an immoral doctrine, namely the lawfulness of tyrannicide.

if the arguments of the present chapter are of any validity, there ought to exist the fullest liberty of professing and discussing, as a matter of ethical conviction, any doctrine, however immoral it may be considered. it would, therefore, be irrelevant and out of place to examine here, whether the doctrine of tyrannicide deserves that title. i shall content myself with saying, that the subject has been at all times one of the open questions of morals; that the act of a private citizen in striking down a criminal, who, by raising himself above the law, has placed himself beyond the reach of legal punishment or control, has been accounted by whole nations, and by some of the best and wisest of men, not a crime, but an act of exalted virtue; and that, right or wrong, it is not of the nature of assassination, but of civil war. as such, i hold that the instigation to it, in a specific case, may be a proper subject of punishment, but only if an overt act has followed, and at least a probable connection can be established between the act and the instigation. even then, it is not a foreign government, but the very government assailed, which alone, in the exercise of self-defence, can legitimately punish attacks directed against its own existence. thomas pooley, bodmin assizes, july 31, 1857. in december following, he received a free pardon from the crown. george jacob holyoake, august 17, 1857; edward truelove, july, 1857. baron de gleichen, marlborough-street police court, august 4, 1857. ample warning may be drawn from the large infusion of the passions of a persecutor, which mingled with the general display of the worst parts of our national character on the occasion of the sepoy insurrection. the ravings of fanatics or charlatans from the pulpit may be unworthy of notice; but the heads of the evangelical party have announced as their principle, for the government of hindoos and mahomedans, that no schools be supported by public money in which the bible is not taught, and by necessary consequence that no public employment be given to any but real or pretended christians. an under-secretary of state, in a speech delivered to his constituents on the 12th of november, 1857, is reported to have said: toleration of their faith (the faith of a hundred millions of british subjects), the superstition which they called religion, by the british government, had had the effect of retarding the ascendency of the british name, and preventing the salutary growth of christianity.... toleration was the great corner-stone of the religious liberties of this country; but do not let them abuse that precious word toleration. as he understood it, it meant the complete liberty to all, freedom of worship, among christians, who worshipped upon the same foundation. it meant toleration of all sects and denominations of christians who believed in the one mediation. i desire to call attention to the fact, that a man who has been deemed fit to fill a high office in the government of this country, under a liberal ministry, maintains the doctrine that all who do not believe in the divinity of christ are beyond the pale of toleration. who, after this imbecile display, can indulge the illusion that religious persecution has passed away, never to return?
if the arguments of my present chapter have any validity, there ought to exist the fullest liberty of proclaiming and discussing as a matter of ethical conviction any doctrine, however immoral it may be considered. so it isn't relevant here to consider whether the doctrine of tyrannicide is immoral. i shall content myself with making three points. (1) this subject has always been one of the open questions of morals. (2) when a private citizen strikes down a criminal who has raised himself above the law and thus placed himself beyond the reach of legal punishment or control, this has been regarded by whole nations and by some of the best and wisest of men not as a crime but as an act of exalted virtue. (3) such an act, whether it be right or wrong, is not of the nature of assassination but rather of civil war. in a particular case, it may be proper to punish someone for inciting others else to it, but only if an overt act has followed, and at least a probable connection can be established between the act and the incitement. even then the only government entitled to punish such attacks is the one that has been attacked. ample warning can be drawn from the way in which, on the occasion of the sepoy insurrection in india, the general display of the worst parts of our national character included a large infusion of the passions of a persecutor. the ravings of fanatics or charlatans from the pulpit may be unworthy of notice; but the heads of the evangelical party have announced as their principle for the government of hindus and moslems that only schools in which the bible is taught should be supported by public money , implying that public employment should be given only to real or pretended christians. an under-secretary of state, in a speech delivered to his constituents in 1857, is reported to have said:

chapter iii. of individuality, as one of the elements of well-being.
chapter 3: individuality one of the elements of well-being

such being the reasons which make it imperative that human beings should be free to form opinions, and to express their opinions without reserve; and such the baneful consequences to the intellectual, and through that to the moral nature of man, unless this liberty is either conceded, or asserted in spite of prohibition; let us next examine whether the same reasons do not require that men should be free to act upon their opinions to carry these out in their lives, without hindrance, either physical or moral, from their fellow-men, so long as it is at their own risk and peril. this last proviso is of course indispensable. no one pretends that actions should be as free as opinions. on the contrary, even opinions lose their immunity, when the circumstances in which they are expressed are such as to constitute their expression a positive instigation to some mischievous act. an opinion that corn-dealers are starvers of the poor, or that private property is robbery, ought to be unmolested when simply circulated through the press, but may justly incur punishment when delivered orally to an excited mob assembled before the house of a corn-dealer, or when handed about among the same mob in the form of a placard. acts, of whatever kind, which, without justifiable cause, do harm to others, may be, and in the more important cases absolutely require to be, controlled by the unfavourable sentiments, and, when needful, by the active interference of mankind. the liberty of the individual must be thus far limited; he must not make himself a nuisance to other people. but if he refrains from molesting others in what concerns them, and merely acts according to his own inclination and judgment in things which concern himself, the same reasons which show that opinion should be free, prove also that he should be allowed, without molestation, to carry his opinions into practice at his own cost. that mankind are not infallible; that their truths, for the most part, are only half-truths; that unity of opinion, unless resulting from the fullest and freest comparison of opposite opinions, is not desirable, and diversity not an evil, but a good, until mankind are much more capable than at present of recognising all sides of the truth, are principles applicable to men's modes of action, not less than to their opinions. as it is useful that while mankind are imperfect there should be different opinions, so is it that there should be different experiments of living; that free scope should be given to varieties of character, short of injury to others; and that the worth of different modes of life should be proved practically, when any one thinks fit to try them. it is desirable, in short, that in things which do not primarily concern others, individuality should assert itself. where, not the person's own character, but the traditions or customs of other people are the rule of conduct, there is wanting one of the principal ingredients of human happiness, and quite the chief ingredient of individual and social progress.
i have presented the reasons that make it imperative that human beings should be free to form opinions and to express them openly, and the pernicious consequences to the intellectual nature of man (and through that to his moral nature) unless this freedom is either granted or claimed in spite of being prohibited. now let us see whether those same reasons don't require that men should be free to act on their opinions to carry them out in their lives, without physical or moral hindrance from their fellow-men, so long as they are acting at their own risk and peril. this last proviso is of course indispensable. no-one claims that actions should be as free as opinions. on the contrary, even opinions lose their immunity when the circumstances in which they are expressed are such that merely expressing them is a positive incitement to some harmful act. the opinion that corn-dealers are starvers of the poor ought to be allowed to pass freely when it is simply presented to the world in print; but someone can justly be punished for announcing it orally or passing it out on a placard to an excited mob that has gathered in front of a corn-dealer's house. (another example might be the opinion that private property is robbery.) acts of any kind that harm others without justifiable cause may be and in the more important cases absolutely must be brought under control, either by adverse opinion or (when necessary) by active interference. the liberty of the individual must be limited by this:

in maintaining this principle, the greatest difficulty to be encountered does not lie in the appreciation of means towards an acknowledged end, but in the indifference of persons in general to the end itself. if it were felt that the free development of individuality is one of the leading essentials of well-being; that it is not only a co-ordinate element with all that is designated by the terms civilisation, instruction, education, culture, but is itself a necessary part and condition of all those things; there would be no danger that liberty should be under-valued, and the adjustment of the boundaries between it and social control would present no extraordinary difficulty. but the evil is, that individual spontaneity is hardly recognised by the common modes of thinking, as having any intrinsic worth, or deserving any regard on its own account. the majority, being satisfied with the ways of mankind as they now are (for it is they who make them what they are), cannot comprehend why those ways should not be good enough for everybody; and what is more, spontaneity forms no part of the ideal of the majority of moral and social reformers, but is rather looked on with jealousy, as a troublesome and perhaps rebellious obstruction to the general acceptance of what these reformers, in their own judgment, think would be best for mankind. few persons, out of germany, even comprehend the meaning of the doctrine which wilhelm von humboldt, so eminent both as a savant and as a politician, made the text of a treatise that the end of man, or that which is prescribed by the eternal or immutable dictates of reason, and not suggested by vague and transient desires, is the highest and most harmonious development of his powers to a complete and consistent whole; that, therefore, the object towards which every human being must ceaselessly direct his efforts, and on which especially those who design to influence their fellow-men must ever keep their eyes, is the individuality of power and development; that for this there are two requisites, freedom, and a variety of situations; and that from the union of these arise individual vigour and manifold diversity, which combine themselves in originality.
the greatest difficulty one meets in maintaining this principle doesn't come from people's views about the means to an acknowledged end, but from their indifference to the end in question. if it were generally felt that the free development of individuality is a leading essential of well-being; that it isn't merely something that comes along with all that we mean by the terms civilization, instruction, education and culture, but is itself a necessary part and precondition of all those things, there would be no danger of liberty's being undervalued, and no great difficult about settling the boundaries between it and social control. the trouble is that in the thinking of most people individual spontaneity is hardly recognized as having any intrinsic value, or as deserving any respect on its own account. the majority are satisfied with the ways of mankind as they now are (of course, for it is they who make them what they are!), and they can't understand why those ways shouldn't be good enough for everybody. as for moral and social reformers who by definition are not satisfied with the ways of mankind as they now are the majority of them don't have spontaneity as any part of their ideal; rather, they look on it with resentment, as a troublesome and perhaps rebellious obstruction to the general acceptance of what these reformers themselves think would be best for mankind. wilhelm von humboldt, so eminent both for his learning and as a politician, based one of his works on the thesis that the end of man, or that which is prescribed by the eternal or immutable dictates of reason and not suggested by vague and transient desires, is the highest and most harmonious development of his powers to a complete and consistent whole; that therefore, that towards which every human being must ceaselessly direct his efforts, and on which especially those who design to influence their fellow-men must ever keep their eyes, is the individuality of power and development; that for this two things are needed, freedom, and a variety of situations; and that from the combination of these arise individual vigour and great diversity, which combine themselves in originality. few people outside germany even understood what he meant!

little, however, as people are accustomed to a doctrine like that of von humboldt, and surprising as it may be to them to find so high a value attached to individuality, the question, one must nevertheless think, can only be one of degree. no one's idea of excellence in conduct is that people should do absolutely nothing but copy one another. no one would assert that people ought not to put into their mode of life, and into the conduct of their concerns, any impress whatever of their own judgment, or of their own individual character. on the other hand, it would be absurd to pretend that people ought to live as if nothing whatever had been known in the world before they came into it; as if experience had as yet done nothing towards showing that one mode of existence, or of conduct, is preferable to another. nobody denies that people should be so taught and trained in youth, as to know and benefit by the ascertained results of human experience. but it is the privilege and proper condition of a human being, arrived at the maturity of his faculties, to use and interpret experience in his own way. it is for him to find out what part of recorded experience is properly applicable to his own circumstances and character. the traditions and customs of other people are, to a certain extent, evidence of what their experience has taught them; presumptive evidence, and as such, have a claim to his deference: but, in the first place, their experience may be too narrow; or they may not have interpreted it rightly. secondly, their interpretation of experience may be correct, but unsuitable to him. customs are made for customary circumstances, and customary characters: and his circumstances or his character may be uncustomary. thirdly, though the customs be both good as customs, and suitable to him, yet to conform to custom, merely as custom, does not educate or develop in him any of the qualities which are the distinctive endowment of a human being. the human faculties of perception, judgment, discriminative feeling, mental activity, and even moral preference, are exercised only in making a choice. he who does anything because it is the custom, makes no choice. he gains no practice either in discerning or in desiring what is best. the mental and moral, like the muscular powers, are improved only by being used. the faculties are called into no exercise by doing a thing merely because others do it, no more than by believing a thing only because others believe it. if the grounds of an opinion are not conclusive to the person's own reason, his reason cannot be strengthened, but is likely to be weakened by his adopting it: and if the inducements to an act are not such as are consentaneous to his own feelings and character (where affection, or the rights of others, are not concerned), it is so much done towards rendering his feelings and character inert and torpid, instead of active and energetic.
and yet, although most people are unaccustomed to a doctrine like that of von humboldt, and surprised to find anyone attaching so high a value to individuality, one has to think that the issue the difference between the majority view and von humboldt's can only be one of degree. looking at it from one side: no-one's idea of excellence in conduct is that people should do absolutely nothing but copy one another. no-one would assert that people ought not to put into their way of life, and into their handling of their affairs, any mark whatever of their own judgment or of their own individual character. on the other hand, it would be absurd to value individuality so absolutely as to claim that people ought to live as if nothing whatever had been known in the world before they came into it; as if experience so far had done nothing towards showing that one way of life or course of conduct is preferable to another. nobody denies that people should be taught and trained in youth so that they can know what has been learned from human experience and can benefit from it. but when a human being has arrived at the maturity of his faculties, it is his privilege and indeed his proper role to use and interpret experience in his own way. it is for him to find out what part of recorded experience is properly applicable to his own circumstances and character. the traditions and customs of other people provide some evidence of what their experience has taught them evidence that has some weight, and thus has a claim to his deference. but there are three reasons for not giving it the final decision about how he should live his life. in the first place, those people's experience may be too narrow, or they may not have interpreted it rightly. secondly, their interpretation of their experience may be correct but unsuitable to him. customs are made for customary circumstances and customary character; and his circumstances or his character may be uncustomary. thirdly, even when the customs are good in themselves and are suitable to him, still he ought not to conform to custom as such, because that doesn't educate or develop in him any of the qualities that are the distinctive endowment of a human being. the human faculties of perception, judgment, discriminative feeling, mental activity, and even moral preference are exercised only in making choices. he who does something because it is the custom doesn't make a choice. he gains no practice either in seeing what is best or in wanting it. like our muscular powers, our mental and moral powers are improved only by being used. you don't bring your faculties into play by doing something merely because others do it, any more than by believing something only because others believe it. if the reasons for an opinion are not conclusive in your way of thinking, your reason can't be strengthened by your adopting the opinion, and is likely instead to be weakened; and if the reasons for acting in a certain way are not in harmony with your feelings and character, acting in that way is contributing towards making your feelings and character inert and slack rather than active and energetic. (i am here setting aside cases where personal affections or the rights of others come into the picture.)

he who lets the world, or his own portion of it, choose his plan of life for him, has no need of any other faculty than the ape-like one of imitation. he who chooses his plan for himself, employs all his faculties. he must use observation to see, reasoning and judgment to foresee, activity to gather materials for decision, discrimination to decide, and when he has decided, firmness and self-control to hold to his deliberate decision. and these qualities he requires and exercises exactly in proportion as the part of his conduct which he determines according to his own judgment and feelings is a large one. it is possible that he might be guided in some good path, and kept out of harm's way, without any of these things. but what will be his comparative worth as a human being? it really is of importance, not only what men do, but also what manner of men they are that do it. among the works of man, which human life is rightly employed in perfecting and beautifying, the first in importance surely is man himself. supposing it were possible to get houses built, corn grown, battles fought, causes tried, and even churches erected and prayers said, by machinery by automatons in human form it would be a considerable loss to exchange for these automatons even the men and women who at present inhabit the more civilised parts of the world, and who assuredly are but starved specimens of what nature can and will produce. human nature is not a machine to be built after a model, and set to do exactly the work prescribed for it, but a tree, which requires to grow and develop itself on all sides, according to the tendency of the inward forces which make it a living thing.
he who lets the world (or his own portion of it) choose his plan of life for him doesn't need any faculty other than the ape-like ability to imitate. he who chooses his plan for himself employs all his faculties. he must use observation to see, reasoning and judgment to foresee, activity to gather materials for decision, discrimination to decide, and, when he has decided, firmness and self-control to keep to his deliberate decision. and how much he requires and uses these abilities depends directly on how much of his conduct is determined according to his own judgment and feelings. he might be guided in some good path, and kept out of harm's way, without any of these things. but in that case what will be his comparative worth as a human being? it really does matter not only what men do but also what sort of men they are that do it. among the works of man that human life is rightly employed in perfecting and beautifying, surely the most important is man himself. supposing it were possible to get houses built, corn grown, battles fought, cases tried, and even churches erected and prayers said, by machinery by automatons in human form it would be a considerable loss to accept automatons in exchange for men and women, even the men and women who at present inhabit the more civilized parts of the world, who are poor specimens of what nature can and will produce. human nature is not a machine to be built on the basis of a blueprint, and set to do exactly the work prescribed for it; rather, it is a tree that needs to grow and develop itself on all sides, according to the tendency of the inward forces that make it a living thing.

it will probably be conceded that it is desirable people should exercise their understandings, and that an intelligent following of custom, or even occasionally an intelligent deviation from custom, is better than a blind and simply mechanical adhesion to it. to a certain extent it is admitted, that our understanding should be our own: but there is not the same willingness to admit that our desires and impulses should be our own likewise; or that to possess impulses of our own, and of any strength, is anything but a peril and a snare. yet desires and impulses are as much a part of a perfect human being, as beliefs and restraints: and strong impulses are only perilous when not properly balanced; when one set of aims and inclinations is developed into strength, while others, which ought to co-exist with them, remain weak and inactive. it is not because men's desires are strong that they act ill; it is because their consciences are weak. there is no natural connection between strong impulses and a weak conscience. the natural connection is the other way. to say that one person's desires and feelings are stronger and more various than those of another, is merely to say that he has more of the raw material of human nature, and is therefore capable, perhaps of more evil, but certainly of more good. strong impulses are but another name for energy. energy may be turned to bad uses; but more good may always be made of an energetic nature, than of an indolent and impassive one. those who have most natural feeling, are always those whose cultivated feelings may be made the strongest. the same strong susceptibilities which make the personal impulses vivid and powerful, are also the source from whence are generated the most passionate love of virtue, and the sternest self-control. it is through the cultivation of these, that society both does its duty and protects its interests: not by rejecting the stuff of which heroes are made, because it knows not how to make them. a person whose desires and impulses are his own are the expression of his own nature, as it has been developed and modified by his own culture is said to have a character. one whose desires and impulses are not his own, has no character, no more than a steam-engine has a character. if, in addition to being his own, his impulses are strong, and are under the government of a strong will, he has an energetic character. whoever thinks that individuality of desires and impulses should not be encouraged to unfold itself, must maintain that society has no need of strong natures is not the better for containing many persons who have much character and that a high general average of energy is not desirable.
it will probably be conceded that it is desirable for people to exercise their understandings, and that an intelligent following of custom or even occasionally an intelligent deviation from custom is better than following custom in a blind and mechanical way. to a certain extent it is admitted that our understanding should be our own. but there isn't the same willingness to admit that our desires and impulses should likewise be our own, or to admit that it is anything but a peril and a snare to possess impulses of our own, unless they are extremely weak. yet desires and impulses are as much a part of a perfect human being as beliefs and restraints. strong impulses are perilous only when they aren't properly balanced i.e. when one set of aims and inclinations is developed into strength while others that ought to coexist with them remain weak and inactive. men act badly not because their desires are strong but because their consciences are weak. there is no natural connection between strong impulses and a weak conscience. the natural connection is the other way. to say that one person's desires and feelings are stronger and more various than those of someone else is merely to say that he has more of the raw material of human nature, and is therefore capable perhaps of more evil but certainly of more good. strong impulses are but another name for energy. energy can be turned to bad uses, but more good can always come from an energetic nature than from a slack and impassive one. those who have most natural feeling are always those whose cultivated feelings the ones developed through education, experience, and thought can also be made the strongest. the strong susceptibilities that make personal impulses vivid and powerful are also the source of the most passionate love of virtue and the sternest self-control. society does its duty and protects its interests by developing these, not by rejecting the stuff of which heroes are made because it doesn't know how to make them! a person whose desires and impulses are his own expressing his own nature as it has been developed and modified by his own culture is said to have a character. (one whose desires and impulses are not his own doesn't have a character, any more than a steam-engine does.) if the impulses are not only his but are strong, and are under the control of a strong will, then he has an energetic character. if you think that individuality of desires and impulses shouldn't be encouraged to unfold itself, you must maintain that society doesn't need strong natures that it isn't the better for containing many people who have much character and that a high average level of energy is not desirable.

in some early states of society, these forces might be, and were, too much ahead of the power which society then possessed of disciplining and controlling them. there has been a time when the element of spontaneity and individuality was in excess, and the social principle had a hard struggle with it. the difficulty then was, to induce men of strong bodies or minds to pay obedience to any rules which required them to control their impulses. to overcome this difficulty, law and discipline, like the popes struggling against the emperors, asserted a power over the whole man, claiming to control all his life in order to control his character which society had not found any other sufficient means of binding. but society has now fairly got the better of individuality; and the danger which threatens human nature is not the excess, but the deficiency, of personal impulses and preferences. things are vastly changed, since the passions of those who were strong by station or by personal endowment were in a state of habitual rebellion against laws and ordinances, and required to be rigorously chained up to enable the persons within their reach to enjoy any particle of security. in our times, from the highest class of society down to the lowest, every one lives as under the eye of a hostile and dreaded censorship. not only in what concerns others, but in what concerns only themselves, the individual, or the family, do not ask themselves what do i prefer? or, what would suit my character and disposition? or, what would allow the best and highest in me to have fair-play, and enable it to grow and thrive? they ask themselves, what is suitable to my position? what is usually done by persons of my station and pecuniary circumstances? or (worse still) what is usually done by persons of a station and circumstances superior to mine? i do not mean that they choose what is customary, in preference to what suits their own inclination. it does not occur to them to have any inclination, except for what is customary. thus the mind itself is bowed to the yoke: even in what people do for pleasure, conformity is the first thing thought of; they live in crowds; they exercise choice only among things commonly done: peculiarity of taste, eccentricity of conduct, are shunned equally with crimes: until by dint of not following their own nature, they have no nature to follow: their human capacities are withered and starved: they become incapable of any strong wishes or native pleasures, and are generally without either opinions or feelings of home growth, or properly their own. now is this, or is it not, the desirable condition of human nature?
in some early states of society, these forces of high-level individual energy were too far ahead of society's power at that time to discipline and control them. there was a time when the element of spontaneity and individuality was excessive, and social forces had a hard struggle with it. the difficulty then was to induce men with strong bodies or minds to obey any rules that required them to control their impulses. to overcome this difficulty, law and discipline behaved like the popes in their struggle against the emperors: they asserted a power over the whole man, claiming to control all his life in order to control his character, which society hadn't found any other sufficient means of binding. but society now has the upper hand over individuality; and the danger that threatens human nature is not too much but too little in the way of personal impulses and preferences. things have vastly changed since the time when the passions of those who were strong (through their rank or position, or through their personal qualities) were in a state of habitual rebellion against laws and ordinances, and had to be strictly held down so that people within their reach might enjoy a little security. in our times, from the highest class of society down to the lowest, everyone lives as though under the eye of a hostile and dreaded censorship. not only in what concerns others but in what concerns only themselves, the individual or the family don't ask themselves: what do i prefer? or what would suit my character and disposition? or what would allow the best and highest in me to have fair play, and enable it to grow and thrive? they ask themselves: what is suitable to my position? what is usually done by people in my position and economic level? or (worse still) what is usually done by people whose position and circumstances are superior to mine? i don't mean that they choose what is customary in preference to what suits their own inclination. it doesn't occur to them to have any inclination except to do what is customary. thus the mind itself is bent under the yoke. even in what people do for pleasure, conformity is the first thing they think of; they like in crowds; they exercise choice only among things that are commonly done; they shun peculiarity of taste and eccentricity of conduct as much as they shun crimes. eventually, by not following their own nature they come to have no nature to follow: their human capacities are withered and starved; they become incapable of any strong wishes or natural pleasures, and are generally without either opinions or feelings that are home-grown and properly theirs. now is this the desirable condition of human nature?

it is so, on the calvinistic theory. according to that, the one great offence of man is self-will. all the good of which humanity is capable, is comprised in obedience. you have no choice; thus you must do, and no otherwise: whatever is not a duty, is a sin. human nature being radically corrupt, there is no redemption for any one until human nature is killed within him. to one holding this theory of life, crushing out any of the human faculties, capacities, and susceptibilities, is no evil: man needs no capacity, but that of surrendering himself to the will of god: and if he uses any of his faculties for any other purpose but to do that supposed will more effectually, he is better without them. that is the theory of calvinism; and it is held, in a mitigated form, by many who do not consider themselves calvinists; the mitigation consisting in giving a less ascetic interpretation to the alleged will of god; asserting it to be his will that mankind should gratify some of their inclinations; of course not in the manner they themselves prefer, but in the way of obedience, that is, in a way prescribed to them by authority; and, therefore, by the necessary conditions of the case, the same for all.
it is so on the calvinistic theory. according to it: the one great offence of man is self-will. obedience contains all the good of which humanity is capable. you have no choice; you must do this and nothing else; whatever isn't a duty is a sin. human nature is radically corrupt, so there is no redemption for anyone until human nature is killed within him. to someone who holds this theory of life, there is nothing wrong with crushing out any of the human faculties, capacities, and susceptibilities. the only capacity man needs is a capacity to surrender himself to the will of god; and if he uses any of his faculties for any purpose but to obey that supposed will more effectively, he is better without them. that is the theory of calvinism; and it is held in a milder form by many who don't consider themselves calvinists. the mildness consists in giving a less ascetic interpretation to the alleged will of god. they hold that it is his will that mankind should gratify some of their inclinations; not of course in the way they themselves prefer, but in the way of obedience i.e. in a way prescribed to them by authority, and therefore inevitably the same for all. the crucial point about this milder form of calvinism is that it still doesn't allow for individuality of character.

in some such insidious form there is at present a strong tendency to this narrow theory of life, and to the pinched and hidebound type of human character which it patronises. many persons, no doubt, sincerely think that human beings thus cramped and dwarfed, are as their maker designed them to be; just as many have thought that trees are a much finer thing when clipped into pollards, or cut out into figures of animals, than as nature made them. but if it be any part of religion to believe that man was made by a good being, it is more consistent with that faith to believe, that this being gave all human faculties that they might be cultivated and unfolded, not rooted out and consumed, and that he takes delight in every nearer approach made by his creatures to the ideal conception embodied in them, every increase in any of their capabilities of comprehension, of action, or of enjoyment. there is a different type of human excellence from the calvinistic; a conception of humanity as having its nature bestowed on it for other purposes than merely to be abnegated. pagan self-assertion is one of the elements of human worth, as well as christian self-denial. there is a greek ideal of self-development, which the platonic and christian ideal of self-government blends with, but does not supersede. it may be better to be a john knox than an alcibiades, but it is better to be a pericles than either; nor would a pericles, if we had one in these days, be without anything good which belonged to john knox.
in some such insidious form as this, there is at present a strong tendency to adopt this narrow theory of life and the pinched and hidebound type of human character that it favours. no doubt many people sincerely think that human beings thus cramped and dwarfed are as their maker designed them to be; just as many have thought that trees with all their lower branches removed or clipped into figures of animals are much finer than in their natural state. but if it is any part of religion to believe that man was made by a good being, it is more consistent with that faith to believe that this being gave humans all their faculties to be developed and unfolded, not rooted out and incinerated, and that he takes delight in every advance his creatures make towards the ideal of which they are capable, every increase in their ability to understand, to act, or to enjoy. according to the calvinistic conception of humanity, we had our nature bestowed on us purely in order to have it stamped out. there is a different ideal of human excellence from that. pagan self-assertion is one of the elements of human worth, as well as christian self-denial (i take the phrases from john sterling's essays). there is a greek ideal of self-development, which the platonic and christian ideal of self-government blends with but does not supersede. it may be better to be a john knox than an alcibiades, but it is better to be a pericles than either; and if we had a pericles today, he would have about him every good that john knox had.

it is not by wearing down into uniformity all that is individual in themselves, but by cultivating it and calling it forth, within the limits imposed by the rights and interests of others, that human beings become a noble and beautiful object of contemplation; and as the works partake the character of those who do them, by the same process human life also becomes rich, diversified, and animating, furnishing more abundant aliment to high thoughts and elevating feelings, and strengthening the tie which binds every individual to the race, by making the race infinitely better worth belonging to. in proportion to the development of his individuality, each person becomes more valuable to himself, and is therefore capable of being more valuable to others. there is a greater fulness of life about his own existence, and when there is more life in the units there is more in the mass which is composed of them. as much compression as is necessary to prevent the stronger specimens of human nature from encroaching on the rights of others, cannot be dispensed with; but for this there is ample compensation even in the point of view of human development. the means of development which the individual loses by being prevented from gratifying his inclinations to the injury of others, are chiefly obtained at the expense of the development of other people. and even to himself there is a full equivalent in the better development of the social part of his nature, rendered possible by the restraint put upon the selfish part. to be held to rigid rules of justice for the sake of others, develops the feelings and capacities which have the good of others for their object. but to be restrained in things not affecting their good, by their mere displeasure, develops nothing valuable, except such force of character as may unfold itself in resisting the restraint. if acquiesced in, it dulls and blunts the whole nature. to give any fair-play to the nature of each, it is essential that different persons should be allowed to lead different lives. in proportion as this latitude has been exercised in any age, has that age been noteworthy to posterity. even despotism does not produce its worst effects, so long as individuality exists under it; and whatever crushes individuality is despotism, by whatever name it may be called, and whether it professes to be enforcing the will of god or the injunctions of men.
the way to make human beings become something noble and beautiful to see and think about is not by wearing down into uniformity all that is individual in them but rather by cultivating it and enabling it to grow, within the limits imposed by the rights and interests of others. and that is also the way to make human life become rich, diversified, and animating, furnishing more abundant nourishment for high thoughts and elevating feelings, and strengthening the tie that binds every individual to the human race by making the race infinitely better worth belonging to. the more each person develops his individuality, the more valuable he becomes to himself, and thus the more capable of being valuable to others. there is a greater fullness of life about his own existence, and when there is more life in the units there is more in the mass that is composed of them. there has to be as much compression of the mass as is necessary to prevent the stronger specimens of human nature from encroaching on the rights of others, but there is ample compensation for this even from the point of view of human development. the means of development that the individual loses by being prevented from gratifying his inclinations at the expense of others was chiefly obtained at the expense of the development of other people, so that this lessening of his development may produce an over-all gain in human development. and even for himself there is really no net loss, because what is suppressed in him in the interests of others is balanced by the better development of the social part of his nature, which is made possible by the restraint put on the selfish part. being held to rigid rules of justice for the sake of others develops the feelings and capacities that aim at the good of others. but being restrained in things that don't affect their good restrained merely by their displeasure develops nothing valuable except such force of character as may develop in resisting the restraint. if the restraint is accepted, it dulls and blunts the person's whole nature. to give any fair play to the nature of each person, it is essential that different people should be allowed to lead different lives. historical periods have been noteworthy to posterity in proportion to how widely they have allowed this. even despotism doesn't produce its worst effects so long as individuality exists under it; and whatever crushes individuality is despotism, whatever name it is given and whether it claims to be enforcing the will of god or the commands of men.

having said that individuality is the same thing with development, and that it is only the cultivation of individuality which produces, or can produce, well-developed human beings, i might here close the argument: for what more or better can be said of any condition of human affairs, than that it brings human beings themselves nearer to the best thing they can be? or what worse can be said of any obstruction to good, than that it prevents this? doubtless, however, these considerations will not suffice to convince those who most need convincing; and it is necessary further to show, that these developed human beings are of some use to the undeveloped to point out to those who do not desire liberty, and would not avail themselves of it, that they may be in some intelligible manner rewarded for allowing other people to make use of it without hindrance.
having said that individuality is the same thing as development, and that the cultivation of individuality is the only thing that does or can produce well-developed human beings, i might here close the argument. for what more or better can be said of any condition of human affairs than that it brings human beings themselves nearer to the best they can be? or what worse can be said of any obstruction to good than that it prevents this? doubtless, however, these considerations won't be enough to convince those who most need convincing. so i need also to show that these developed human beings are of some use to undeveloped ones to point out, to those who don't want liberty and wouldn't avail themselves of it if they could, that they may be rewarded in some way they can understand for freely allowing other people to make use of liberty.

in the first place, then, i would suggest that they might possibly learn something from them. it will not be denied by anybody, that originality is a valuable element in human affairs. there is always need of persons not only to discover new truths, and point out when what were once truths are true no longer, but also to commence new practices, and set the example of more enlightened conduct, and better taste and sense in human life. this cannot well be gainsaid by anybody who does not believe that the world has already attained perfection in all its ways and practices. it is true that this benefit is not capable of being rendered by everybody alike: there are but few persons, in comparison with the whole of mankind, whose experiments, if adopted by others, would be likely to be any improvement on established practice. but these few are the salt of the earth; without them, human life would become a stagnant pool. not only is it they who introduce good things which did not before exist; it is they who keep the life in those which already existed. if there were nothing new to be done, would human intellect cease to be necessary? would it be a reason why those who do the old things should forget why they are done, and do them like cattle, not like human beings? there is only too great a tendency in the best beliefs and practices to degenerate into the mechanical; and unless there were a succession of persons whose ever-recurring originality prevents the grounds of those beliefs and practices from becoming merely traditional, such dead matter would not resist the smallest shock from anything really alive, and there would be no reason why civilisation should not die out, as in the byzantine empire. persons of genius, it is true, are, and are always likely to be, a small minority; but in order to have them, it is necessary to preserve the soil in which they grow. genius can only breathe freely in an atmosphere of freedom. persons of genius are, ex vi termini, more individual than any other people less capable, consequently, of fitting themselves, without hurtful compression, into any of the small number of moulds which society provides in order to save its members the trouble of forming their own character. if from timidity they consent to be forced into one of these moulds, and to let all that part of themselves which cannot expand under the pressure remain unexpanded, society will be little the better for their genius. if they are of a strong character, and break their fetters, they become a mark for the society which has not succeeded in reducing them to commonplace, to point at with solemn warning as wild, erratic, and the like; much as if one should complain of the niagara river for not flowing smoothly between its banks like a dutch canal.
in the first place, then, i suggest that those who don't want liberty might possibly learn something from the exercise of liberty by those who do want it. no-one will deny that originality is a valuable element in human affairs. there is always need for people not only to discover new truths and point out when a former truth is true no longer, but also to start new practices and to set the example of more enlightened conduct and of better taste and sense in human life. someone who denied this would have to think that the world has already attained perfection in all its ways and practices! admittedly, not everyone is able to provide this benefit; there are few people a small fragment of the whole of mankind whose experiments in living, if adopted by others, would be likely to be an improvement on established practice. but these few are the salt of the earth; without them, human life would become a stagnant pool. i'm talking not only about the ones who introduce good things that didn't exist before, but also about those who keep alive the good things that already exist. if there were nothing new to be done, would human intellect cease to be necessary? would it be a reason why those who do the old things should forget why they are done, and do them like cattle rather than like human beings? there is only too great a tendency for even the best beliefs and practices to degenerate into something mechanical; and unless there were a succession of people whose ever-recurring originality prevents the grounds of those beliefs and practices from becoming merely traditional, such dead matter wouldn't survive the smallest jolt from anything really alive, and there would be no reason why civilization shouldn't die out as did the byzantine empire. it's true that persons of genius are and probably always will be a small minority; but in order to have them we must preserve the soil in which they grow. genius can breathe freely only in an atmosphere of freedom. persons of genius are by definition more individual than other people and therefore less able to squeeze themselves, without being harmed, into any of the small number of moulds that society provides in order to save its members the trouble of forming their own character. if out of timidity they consent to be forced into one of these moulds, and to let all that part of themselves that can't expand under the pressure remain unexpanded, society won't gain much from their genius. if they are of a strong character and break their fetters, they become a target for the society that hasn't succeeded in reducing them to something commonplace, to point at with solemn warning as wild, erratic, and so on; like complaining against the niagara river because it doesn't flow smoothly between its banks like a dutch canal.

i insist thus emphatically on the importance of genius, and the necessity of allowing it to unfold itself freely both in thought and in practice, being well aware that no one will deny the position in theory, but knowing also that almost every one, in reality, is totally indifferent to it. people think genius a fine thing if it enables a man to write an exciting poem, or paint a picture. but in its true sense, that of originality in thought and action, though no one says that it is not a thing to be admired, nearly all, at heart, think that they can do very well without it. unhappily this is too natural to be wondered at. originality is the one thing which unoriginal minds cannot feel the use of. they cannot see what it is to do for them: how should they? if they could see what it would do for them, it would not be originality. the first service which originality has to render them, is that of opening their eyes: which being once fully done, they would have a chance of being themselves original. meanwhile, recollecting that nothing was ever yet done which some one was not the first to do, and that all good things which exist are the fruits of originality, let them be modest enough to believe that there is something still left for it to accomplish, and assure themselves that they are more in need of originality, the less they are conscious of the want.
when i insist so emphatically on the importance of genius, and the need to allow it to unfold freely both in thought and in practice, i'm well aware that no-one will deny this position in theory, and also that almost everyone is really totally indifferent to it. people think genius a fine thing if it enables a man to write an exciting poem or paint a picture. but in the true sense of genius, that of originality in thought and action, though no-one says that it isn't a thing to be admired, most people secretly think they can do very well without it. this, alas, is too natural to be wondered at. originality is the one thing that unoriginal minds cannot feel the use of. they can't see what it is to do for them how could they? if they could see what it would do for them it wouldn't be originality. the first thing that originality has to do for them is to open their eyes; and if they got their eyes fully open, they too would have a chance of being original. meanwhile, recollecting that nothing was ever yet done that someone didn't do first, and that all good things that exist are the fruits of originality, let them the unoriginal people be modest enough to believe that there is something still left for originality to accomplish, and assure themselves that the less conscious they are of their lack of originality the greater is their need for it.

in sober truth, whatever homage may be professed, or even paid, to real or supposed mental superiority, the general tendency of things throughout the world is to render mediocrity the ascendant power among mankind. in ancient history, in the middle ages, and in a diminishing degree through the long transition from feudality to the present time, the individual was a power in himself; and if he had either great talents or a high social position, he was a considerable power. at present individuals are lost in the crowd. in politics it is almost a triviality to say that public opinion now rules the world. the only power deserving the name is that of masses, and of governments while they make themselves the organ of the tendencies and instincts of masses. this is as true in the moral and social relations of private life as in public transactions. those whose opinions go by the name of public opinion, are not always the same sort of public: in america they are the whole white population; in england, chiefly the middle class. but they are always a mass, that is to say, collective mediocrity. and what is a still greater novelty, the mass do not now take their opinions from dignitaries in church or state, from ostensible leaders, or from books. their thinking is done for them by men much like themselves, addressing them or speaking in their name, on the spur of the moment, through the newspapers. i am not complaining of all this. i do not assert that anything better is compatible, as a general rule, with the present low state of the human mind. but that does not hinder the government of mediocrity from being mediocre government. no government by a democracy or a numerous aristocracy, either in its political acts or in the opinions, qualities, and tone of mind which it fosters, ever did or could rise above mediocrity, except in so far as the sovereign many have let themselves be guided (which in their best times they always have done) by the counsels and influence of a more highly gifted and instructed one or few. the initiation of all wise or noble things, comes and must come from individuals; generally at first from some one individual. the honour and glory of the average man is that he is capable of following that initiative; that he can respond internally to wise and noble things, and be led to them with his eyes open. i am not countenancing the sort of hero-worship which applauds the strong man of genius for forcibly seizing on the government of the world and making it do his bidding in spite of itself. all he can claim is, freedom to point out the way. the power of compelling others into it, is not only inconsistent with the freedom and development of all the rest, but corrupting to the strong man himself. it does seem, however, that when the opinions of masses of merely average men are everywhere become or becoming the dominant power, the counterpoise and corrective to that tendency would be, the more and more pronounced individuality of those who stand on the higher eminences of thought. it is in these circumstances most especially, that exceptional individuals, instead of being deterred, should be encouraged in acting differently from the mass. in other times there was no advantage in their doing so, unless they acted not only differently, but better. in this age the mere example of nonconformity, the mere refusal to bend the knee to custom, is itself a service. precisely because the tyranny of opinion is such as to make eccentricity a reproach, it is desirable, in order to break through that tyranny, that people should be eccentric. eccentricity has always abounded when and where strength of character has abounded; and the amount of eccentricity in a society has generally been proportional to the amount of genius, mental vigour, and moral courage which it contained. that so few now dare to be eccentric, marks the chief danger of the time.
in sober truth, whatever may be said or even done to honour real or supposed mental superiority, the general tendency of things throughout the world is to render mediocrity the dominant power among mankind. in ancient history, in the middle ages, and to a lessening extent through the long transition from feudal times to the present, the individual was a power in himself; and if he had either great talents or a high social position he was a considerable power. these days individuals are lost in the crowd. in politics it almost goes without saying that public opinion now rules the world. the only power that deserves the name is that of the masses, and of governments when they act out the tendencies and instincts of the masses. this is as true in the moral and social relations of private life as in public transactions. those whose opinions go by the name of public opinion are not the same sort of public in every country: in america they are the whole white population, in england chiefly the middle class. but they are always a mass, that is to say, collective mediocrity. and a still greater novelty of the present age is this: the mass don't now take their opinions from dignitaries in church or state, from recognized leaders, or from books. their thinking is done for them by men much like themselves, addressing them or speaking in their name on the spur of the moment, through the newspapers. i'm not complaining of all this. i don't assert that anything better is generally compatible with the present low state of the human mind. but that doesn't stop the government of mediocrity from being mediocre government. no government by democracy or a numerous aristocracy, either in its political acts or in the opinions, qualities, and tone of mind that it encourages, ever did or could rise above mediocrity, except in so far as the all-powerful many have let themselves be guided (which in their best times they always have done) by the advice and influence of a more highly gifted and instructed one or few. all wise or noble things are and must be started by individuals; generally by some one individual. the honour and glory of the average man is that he is capable of following that start, that he can respond internally to wise and noble things and be led to them with his eyes open. i am not endorsing the sort of hero-worship that applauds the strong man of genius for forcibly taking over the government of the world and making it do his bidding in spite of itself. all he is entitled to is freedom to point out the way. the power of compelling others to follow it is not only inconsistent with the freedom and development of everyone else but is also corrupting to the strong man himself. however, at a time when the opinions of masses of merely average men have become or are becoming the dominant power, it does seem that what is needed as a counter-weight and corrective to that tendency is more and more conspicuous individuality on the part of those who stand at the higher levels of thought. it is especially in these circumstances that exceptional individuals, instead of being deterred, should be encouraged to act differently from the mass. at other times there was no advantage in their doing so, unless they acted not only differently but better. in the present age the mere example of non-conformity, the mere refusal to bend the knee to custom, is itself a service even if the way of life it leads to is not better than than that of the mass but only different from it. precisely because the tyranny of public opinion works so as to make eccentricity a fault, it is desirable, in order to break through that tyranny, that people should be eccentric. there has always been plenty of eccentricity when and where there has been plenty of strength of character; and the amount of eccentricity in a society has generally been proportional to the amount of genius, mental vigour, and moral courage the society contained. that so few now dare to be eccentric marks the chief danger of the time.

i have said that it is important to give the freest scope possible to uncustomary things, in order that it may in time appear which of these are fit to be converted into customs. but independence of action, and disregard of custom are not solely deserving of encouragement for the chance they afford that better modes of action, and customs more worthy of general adoption, may be struck out; nor is it only persons of decided mental superiority who have a just claim to carry on their lives in their own way. there is no reason that all human existences should be constructed on some one, or some small number of patterns. if a person possesses any tolerable amount of common-sense and experience, his own mode of laying out his existence is the best, not because it is the best in itself, but because it is his own mode. human beings are not like sheep; and even sheep are not undistinguishably alike. a man cannot get a coat or a pair of boots to fit him, unless they are either made to his measure, or he has a whole warehouseful to choose from: and is it easier to fit him with a life than with a coat, or are human beings more like one another in their whole physical and spiritual conformation than in the shape of their feet? if it were only that people have diversities of taste, that is reason enough for not attempting to shape them all after one model. but different persons also require different conditions for their spiritual development; and can no more exist healthily in the same moral, than all the variety of plants can in the same physical, atmosphere and climate. the same things which are helps to one person towards the cultivation of his higher nature, are hindrances to another. the same mode of life is a healthy excitement to one, keeping all his faculties of action and enjoyment in their best order, while to another it is a distracting burthen, which suspends or crushes all internal life. such are the differences among human beings in their sources of pleasure, their susceptibilities of pain, and the operation on them of different physical and moral agencies, that unless there is a corresponding diversity in their modes of life, they neither obtain their fair share of happiness, nor grow up to the mental, moral, and aesthetic stature of which their nature is capable. why then should tolerance, as far as the public sentiment is concerned, extend only to tastes and modes of life which extort acquiescence by the multitude of their adherents? nowhere (except in some monastic institutions) is diversity of taste entirely unrecognised; a person may, without blame, either like or dislike rowing, or smoking, or music, or athletic exercises, or chess, or cards, or study, because both those who like each of these things, and those who dislike them, are too numerous to be put down. but the man, and still more the woman, who can be accused either of doing what nobody does, or of not doing what everybody does, is the subject of as much depreciatory remark as if he or she had committed some grave moral delinquency. persons require to possess a title, or some other badge of rank, or of the consideration of people of rank, to be able to indulge somewhat in the luxury of doing as they like without detriment to their estimation. to indulge somewhat, i repeat: for whoever allow themselves much of that indulgence, incur the risk of something worse than disparaging speeches they are in peril of a commission de lunatico, and of having their property taken from them and given to their relations.
i have said that it is important to give the freest possible scope to uncustomary things, so that in due course some of these may turn out to be fit to be converted into customs. but independence of action and disregard of custom don't deserve encouragement only because they may lead to better ways of action and customs more worthy of general adoption; and people of decided mental superiority are not the only ones with a just claim to carry on their lives in their own way. there is no reason why all human lives should be constructed on some one pattern or some small number of patterns. if a person has even a moderate amount of common sense and experience, his own way of planning his way of life is the best, not because it is the best in itself but because it is his own way. human beings are not like sheep; and even sheep aren't indistinguishably alike. a man can't get a coat or a pair of boots to fit him unless they are either made to his measure or he has a whole warehouse full or coats or boots to choose from. well, is it easier to fit him with a life than with a coat? are human beings more like one another in their whole physical and spiritual make-up than in the shape of their feet? if it were only that people differ in their tastes, that would be reason enough for not trying to fit them all into one mould. but different people also need different conditions for their spiritual development; they can't all exist healthily in the same moral atmosphere and climate any more than all plants can flourish in the same physical climate. the very things that help one person to develop his higher nature hinder another from doing so. a way of life that is a healthy excitement to one person, keeping all his faculties of action and enjoyment in their best order, is to another a distracting burden that suspends or crushes all his inner life. such are the differences among human beings in their sources of pleasure, their susceptibilities to pain, and the operation on them of different physical and moral forces, that unless there is a corresponding variety in their ways of life they won't get their fair share of happiness and won't rise to the mental, moral, and aesthetic level that they are naturally capable of. why then should tolerance, as far as the public attitude is concerned, extend only to tastes and ways of life that have to be accepted because so many people have them? nowhere (except in some monastic institutions) is diversity of taste entirely unrecognized: a person may without blame either like or dislike rowing, or smoking, or music, or athletic exercises, or chess, or cards, or study, because those who like each of these things are too numerous to suppress, and so are those who dislike them. but the man and still more the woman who can be accused either of doing what nobody does or of not doing what everybody does is criticized as much as if he or she had committed some serious moral offence. you need to have a title, or some other badge of rank or of support from by people of rank, if you're to be able to indulge somewhat in the luxury of doing as you like without harm to your reputation. to indulge somewhat, i repeat; for someone who allows himself much of that indulgence that permission to differ runs the risk of something worse than verbal criticism; they are in danger of being committed as lunatics and of having their property taken from them and given to their relations.

there is one characteristic of the present direction of public opinion, peculiarly calculated to make it intolerant of any marked demonstration of individuality. the general average of mankind are not only moderate in intellect, but also moderate in inclinations: they have no tastes or wishes strong enough to incline them to do anything unusual, and they consequently do not understand those who have, and class all such with the wild and intemperate whom they are accustomed to look down upon. now, in addition to this fact which is general, we have only to suppose that a strong movement has set in towards the improvement of morals, and it is evident what we have to expect. in these days such a movement has set in; much has actually been effected in the way of increased regularity of conduct, and discouragement of excesses; and there is a philanthropic spirit abroad, for the exercise of which there is no more inviting field than the moral and prudential improvement of our fellow-creatures. these tendencies of the times cause the public to be more disposed than at most former periods to prescribe general rules of conduct, and endeavour to make every one conform to the approved standard. and that standard, express or tacit, is to desire nothing strongly. its ideal of character is to be without any marked character; to maim by compression, like a chinese lady's foot, every part of human nature which stands out prominently, and tends to make the person markedly dissimilar in outline to commonplace humanity.
one characteristic of the present direction of public opinion is especially calculated to make it intolerant of any notable signs of individuality. the general average of mankind are moderate middling not only in intellect but also in inclinations: they haven't any tastes or wishes strong enough to incline them to do anything unusual, so they don't understand those who have, and classify all such people with the wild and intemperate whom they are accustomed to look down on. combine this general fact with the supposition that a strong movement has started towards the improvement of morals, and it is obvious what we have to expect! well, in these days such a movement has started: much has actually been brought about in the way of increased regularity of conduct and discouragement of excesses; and there is a widespread sense of philanthropy for the moral and prudential improvement of our fellow-creatures there is no more inviting field than that. these tendencies of the times cause the public to be more disposed than at almost any earlier time to prescribe general rules of conduct and try to make everyone conform to the approved standard. and that standard whether stated or silently understood is to desire nothing strongly. its ideal of character is to be without any notable character, to maim by compression (like a chinese lady's foot) every part of human nature that stands out prominently, and tends to make the person noticeably dissimilar in outline to commonplace humanity.

as is usually the case with ideals which exclude one-half of what is desirable, the present standard of approbation produces only an inferior imitation of the other half. instead of great energies guided by vigorous reason, and strong feelings strongly controlled by a conscientious will, its result is weak feelings and weak energies, which therefore can be kept in outward conformity to rule without any strength either of will or of reason. already energetic characters on any large scale are becoming merely traditional. there is now scarcely any outlet for energy in this country except business. the energy expended in that may still be regarded as considerable. what little is left from that employment, is expended on some hobby; which may be a useful, even a philanthropic hobby, but is always some one thing, and generally a thing of small dimensions. the greatness of england is now all collective: individually small, we only appear capable of anything great by our habit of combining; and with this our moral and religious philanthropists are perfectly contented. but it was men of another stamp than this that made england what it has been; and men of another stamp will be needed to prevent its decline.
as usually happens with ideals that exclude half of what is desirable, the present standard for approval produces only an inferior imitation of the other half. instead of great energies guided by vigorous reason, and strong feelings strongly controlled by a conscientious will, its result is weak feelings and weak energies, and just because they are weak they can be kept in outward conformity to the rules without any strength either of will or of reason. there is now scarcely any outlet for energy in this country except business. the energy expended in that may still be regarded as considerable. what little is left over from business is spent on some hobby it may be a useful hobby, even a philanthropic one, but it is always some one thing, and generally a small thing. the greatness of england is now all collective: we are all individually small, and seem to be capable of great things only through our habit of combining; and with this state of affairs our moral and religious philanthropists are perfectly contented. but it was men of a different type from this that made england what it has been, and men of a different type will be needed to prevent england's decline.

the despotism of custom is everywhere the standing hindrance to human advancement, being in unceasing antagonism to that disposition to aim at something better than customary, which is called, according to circumstances, the spirit of liberty, or that of progress or improvement. the spirit of improvement is not always a spirit of liberty, for it may aim at forcing improvements on an unwilling people; and the spirit of liberty, in so far as it resists such attempts, may ally itself locally and temporarily with the opponents of improvement; but the only unfailing and permanent source of improvement is liberty, since by it there are as many possible independent centres of improvement as there are individuals. the progressive principle, however, in either shape, whether as the love of liberty or of improvement, is antagonistic to the sway of custom, involving at least emancipation from that yoke; and the contest between the two constitutes the chief interest of the history of mankind. the greater part of the world has, properly speaking, no history, because the despotism of custom is complete. this is the case over the whole east. custom is there, in all things, the final appeal; justice and right mean conformity to custom; the argument of custom no one, unless some tyrant intoxicated with power, thinks of resisting. and we see the result. those nations must once have had originality; they did not start out of the ground populous, lettered, and versed in many of the arts of life; they made themselves all this, and were then the greatest and most powerful nations in the world. what are they now? the subjects or dependants of tribes whose forefathers wandered in the forests when theirs had magnificent palaces and gorgeous temples, but over whom custom exercised only a divided rule with liberty and progress. a people, it appears, may be progressive for a certain length of time, and then stop: when does it stop? when it ceases to possess individuality. if a similar change should befall the nations of europe, it will not be in exactly the same shape: the despotism of custom with which these nations are threatened is not precisely stationariness. it proscribes singularity, but it does not preclude change, provided all change together. we have discarded the fixed costumes of our forefathers; every one must still dress like other people, but the fashion may change once or twice a year. we thus take care that when there is change, it shall be for change's sake, and not from any idea of beauty or convenience; for the same idea of beauty or convenience would not strike all the world at the same moment, and be simultaneously thrown aside by all at another moment. but we are progressive as well as changeable: we continually make new inventions in mechanical things, and keep them until they are again superseded by better; we are eager for improvement in politics, in education, even in morals, though in this last our idea of improvement chiefly consists in persuading or forcing other people to be as good as ourselves. it is not progress that we object to; on the contrary, we flatter ourselves that we are the most progressive people who ever lived. it is individuality that we war against: we should think we had done wonders if we had made ourselves all alike; forgetting that the unlikeness of one person to another is generally the first thing which draws the attention of either to the imperfection of his own type, and the superiority of another, or the possibility, by combining the advantages of both, of producing something better than either. we have a warning example in china a nation of much talent, and, in some respects, even wisdom, owing to the rare good fortune of having been provided at an early period with a particularly good set of customs, the work, in some measure, of men to whom even the most enlightened european must accord, under certain limitations, the title of sages and philosophers. they are remarkable, too, in the excellence of their apparatus for impressing, as far as possible, the best wisdom they possess upon every mind in the community, and securing that those who have appropriated most of it shall occupy the posts of honour and power. surely the people who did this have discovered the secret of human progressiveness, and must have kept themselves steadily at the head of the movement of the world. on the contrary, they have become stationary have remained so for thousands of years; and if they are ever to be farther improved, it must be by foreigners. they have succeeded beyond all hope in what english philanthropists are so industriously working at in making a people all alike, all governing their thoughts and conduct by the same maxims and rules; and these are the fruits. the modern regime of public opinion is, in an unorganised form, what the chinese educational and political systems are in an organised; and unless individuality shall be able successfully to assert itself against this yoke, europe, notwithstanding its noble antecedents and its professed christianity, will tend to become another china.
the despotism of custom is everywhere the permanent blockage to human advancement, because it never loses its hostility to the disposition to aim at something better than what is customary, a disposition that is called depending on the circumstances the spirit of liberty, or the spirit of progress or of improvement. these three are not exactly the same, and i shall say a little about how they inter-relate. the spirit of improvement isn't always a spirit of liberty, for it may aim at forcing improvements on an unwilling people; and when the spirit of liberty resists such attempts it becomes, in that place and for a while, an ally of the opponents of improvement. but the only unfailing and permanent source of improvement is liberty, since through liberty there are as many possible independent centres of improvement as there are individuals. the progressive principle can be the love of liberty or the love of improvement; and either way it is antagonistic to the sway of custom, involving at least emancipation from that yoke; and what is of most interest in the history of mankind is this contest between improvement and custom. most parts of the world have no history properly so-called, because in them the despotism of custom is complete. this is the case over the whole east. no-one there thinks of resisting the argument from custom, except perhaps some tyrant intoxicated with power. and we see the result. those nations must once have had originality: they didn't spring up out of the ground populous, literate, and skilled in many of the arts of life; they made themselves like that, and at that time were the greatest and most powerful nations in the world. what are they now? the subjects or dependents of europeans tribes whose forefathers wandered in the forests when theirs had magnificent palaces and gorgeous temples, but who subsequently had the good fortune that among them custom shared its power with liberty and progress. it seems that a people may be progressive for a certain length of time and then stop. when does it stop? when it ceases to possess individuality. if a similar change comes over the nations of europe, it won't have exactly the same shape as in the east, because the despotism of custom with which the european nations are threatened is not precisely stationariness. it forbids singularity, but it doesn't rule out change, provided we all change together. we have discarded the fixed costumes of our forefathers; everyone must still dress like other people, but the fashion may change once or twice a year. in this way we take care that when there is change it is for the sake of change, and not from any idea of beauty or convenience; for the same idea of beauty or convenience would not strike all the world at the same moment and be simultaneously thrown aside by everyone at another moment, and so to give any power to ideas of beauty or convenience would be a threat to uniformity. but we are progressive as well as changeable: we continually make new inventions in mechanical things, and keep them until they are superseded by something better; we are eager for improvement in politics, in education, even in morals, though our idea of moral improvement chiefly consists in persuading or forcing other people to be as good as we are. it isn't progress that we object to; on the contrary, we flatter ourselves that we are the most progressive people who ever lived. it is individuality that we war against: we would think we had done wonders if we had made ourselves all alike, forgetting that one person's unlikeness to another is generally what first draws the attention of either of them to the imperfection of his own type and the superiority of the other, or the possibility of combining the advantages of both so as to produce something better than either. we have a warning example in china a nation of much talent, and even much wisdom in some respects. this is due to china's rare good fortune in having been provided at an early period with a particularly good set of customs that were partly the work of men to whom even the most enlightened european must grant the title of sages and philosophers (with certain limitations). the chinese are remarkable, too, in the excellence of their apparatus for implanting (as far as possible) the best wisdom they have in every mind in the community, and seeing to it that those who have acquired the most of that wisdom occupy the positions of honour and power. surely you might think the people who did this have discovered the secret of human progressiveness, and must have kept themselves steadily at the head of the movement of the world. on the contrary, they have become stationary have remained so for thousands of years and if they are ever to be further improved it must be by foreigners. they have succeeded beyond all hope in doing what english philanthropists are so industriously working at, namely making a people all alike, all governing their thoughts and conduct by the same maxims and rules; and these the chinese people of today are the fruits of that success. the modern regime of public opinion is an unorganized version of what the chinese educational and political systems have in an organized form; and unless individuality can successfully assert itself against this yoke, europe, despite its noble antecedents and its professed christianity, will tend to become another china.

what is it that has hitherto preserved europe from this lot? what has made the european family of nations an improving, instead of a stationary portion of mankind? not any superior excellence in them, which, when it exists, exists as the effect, not as the cause; but their remarkable diversity of character and culture. individuals, classes, nations, have been extremely unlike one another: they have struck out a great variety of paths, each leading to something valuable; and although at every period those who travelled in different paths have been intolerant of one another, and each would have thought it an excellent thing if all the rest could have been compelled to travel his road, their attempts to thwart each other's development have rarely had any permanent success, and each has in time endured to receive the good which the others have offered. europe is, in my judgment, wholly indebted to this plurality of paths for its progressive and many-sided development. but it already begins to possess this benefit in a considerably less degree. it is decidedly advancing towards the chinese ideal of making all people alike. m. de tocqueville, in his last important work, remarks how much more the frenchmen of the present day resemble one another, than did those even of the last generation. the same remark might be made of englishmen in a far greater degree. in a passage already quoted from wilhelm von humboldt, he points out two things as necessary conditions of human development, because necessary to render people unlike one another; namely, freedom, and variety of situations. the second of these two conditions is in this country every day diminishing. the circumstances which surround different classes and individuals, and shape their characters, are daily becoming more assimilated. formerly, different ranks, different neighbourhoods, different trades and professions, lived in what might be called different worlds; at present, to a great degree in the same. comparatively speaking, they now read the same things, listen to the same things, see the same things, go to the same places, have their hopes and fears directed to the same objects, have the same rights and liberties, and the same means of asserting them. great as are the differences of position which remain, they are nothing to those which have ceased. and the assimilation is still proceeding. all the political changes of the age promote it, since they all tend to raise the low and to lower the high. every extension of education promotes it, because education brings people under common influences, and gives them access to the general stock of facts and sentiments. improvements in the means of communication promote it, by bringing the inhabitants of distant places into personal contact, and keeping up a rapid flow of changes of residence between one place and another. the increase of commerce and manufactures promotes it, by diffusing more widely the advantages of easy circumstances, and opening all objects of ambition, even the highest, to general competition, whereby the desire of rising becomes no longer the character of a particular class, but of all classes. a more powerful agency than even all these, in bringing about a general similarity among mankind, is the complete establishment, in this and other free countries, of the ascendency of public opinion in the state. as the various social eminences which enabled persons entrenched on them to disregard the opinion of the multitude, gradually become levelled; as the very idea of resisting the will of the public, when it is positively known that they have a will, disappears more and more from the minds of practical politicians; there ceases to be any social support for non-conformity any substantive power in society, which, itself opposed to the ascendency of numbers, is interested in taking under its protection opinions and tendencies at variance with those of the public.
what is it that has so far preserved europe from this fate? what has made the european family of nations an improving rather than a stationary portion of mankind? it's not that they are more excellent than the chinese; when excellence exists it is an effect of improvement, not a cause. rather, it is the remarkable diversity of character and culture among the europeans. individuals, classes, and nations have been extremely unlike one another; they have set out on a great variety of paths, each leading to something valuable; and although at every period those who travelled in different paths have been intolerant of one another, and each would have thought it an excellent thing if all the rest could have been compelled to travel his road, their attempts to block each other's development have rarely had any permanent success, and each has in time had to put up with receiving the good which the others have offered! europe's progressive and many-sided development is due, in my judgment, wholly to this plurality of paths. but it is already starting to have less of this benefit. it is decidedly advancing towards the chinese ideal of making all people alike. m. de tocqueville, in his last important work, remarks how much more the frenchmen of the present day resemble one another than did those even of the last generation. the same remark might be made of englishmen in a far greater degree. in a passage i have already quoted, wilhelm von humboldt points out two things as required for human development because they are required to make people unlike one another namely, freedom and variety of situations. the second of these is diminishing day by day in this country. the circumstances that surround different classes and individuals, and shape their characters, are daily becoming more assimilated to one another. formerly, different ranks, neighbourhoods, trades, professions lived in what might be called different worlds; at present to a great degree they inhabit the same world. comparatively speaking, they now read the same things, listen to the same things, see the same things, go to the same places, have their hopes and fears directed to the same objects, have the same rights and liberties, and the same means of asserting them. great as are the differences of position that remain, they are nothing compared with the differences that have gone. and the assimilation still goes on. all the political changes of the day promote it, since they all tend to raise the low and to lower the high. every extension of education promotes it, because education brings people under common influences and gives them access to the general stock of facts and sentiments. improvements in the means of communication promote it by bringing the inhabitants of distant places into personal contact, and keeping up a rapid flow of changes of residence between one place and another. the increase in commerce and manufacture promotes it by spreading more widely the advantages of comfortable circumstances, and by opening all objects of ambition even the highest to general competition, so that the desire to rise is no longer a mark of a particular class but of all classes. a force that is even more powerful than all these in bringing about a general similarity among mankind is the way public opinion, in this and other free countries, completely dominates the state. there used to be various social eminences which enabled persons entrenched on them to disregard the opinion of the multitude, but they have gradually become levelled. the very idea of resisting the will of the public, when they are positively known to have a will, disappears more and more from the minds of practical politicians. so there stops being any social support for non-conformity any substantive social power that is itself opposed to the dominance of numbers, and has a concern for taking under its protection opinions and tendencies that are at odds with those of the public.

the combination of all these causes forms so great a mass of influences hostile to individuality, that it is not easy to see how it can stand its ground. it will do so with increasing difficulty, unless the intelligent part of the public can be made to feel its value to see that it is good there should be differences, even though not for the better, even though, as it may appear to them, some should be for the worse. if the claims of individuality are ever to be asserted, the time is now, while much is still wanting to complete the enforced assimilation. it is only in the earlier stages that any stand can be successfully made against the encroachment. the demand that all other people shall resemble ourselves, grows by what it feeds on. if resistance waits till life is reduced nearly to one uniform type, all deviations from that type will come to be considered impious, immoral, even monstrous and contrary to nature. mankind speedily become unable to conceive diversity, when they have been for some time unaccustomed to see it.
the combination of all these causes forms so great a mass of influences hostile to individuality that it is hard to see how it can stand its ground. it will do so with increasing difficulty unless the intelligent part of the public can be made to feel its value to see that it is good that there should be differences, even if not for the better, indeed even if it sometimes seems to them to be for the worse. if the claims of individuality are ever to be asserted, the time is now, when the enforced assimilation is still far from complete. it is only in the earlier stages that any defence can be successfully mounted against the attack. the demand that all other people shall resemble ourselves grows by what it feeds on. if there is no resistance until life is reduced nearly to one uniform type, all variations from that type will come to be considered impious, immoral, even monstrous and contrary to nature. when mankind spend some time without seeing diversity, they quickly become unable even to conceive it.

chapter iv.
chapter 4: the limits to the authority of society over the individual

of the limits to the authority of society over the individual.
what, then, is the rightful limit to the sovereignty of the individual over himself? where does the authority of society begin? how much of human life should be assigned to individuality, and how much to society?

what, then, is the rightful limit to the sovereignty of the individual over himself? where does the authority of society begin? how much of human life should be assigned to individuality, and how much to society? each will receive its proper share, if each has that which more particularly concerns it. to individuality should belong the part of life in which it is chiefly the individual that is interested; to society, the part which chiefly interests society.
each will receive its proper share if each has that which more particularly concerns it. to individuality should belong the part of life in which it is chiefly the individual that is interested; to society, the part which chiefly interests society.

though society is not founded on a contract, and though no good purpose is answered by inventing a contract in order to deduce social obligations from it, every one who receives the protection of society owes a return for the benefit, and the fact of living in society renders it indispensable that each should be bound to observe a certain line of conduct towards the rest. this conduct consists, first, in not injuring the interests of one another; or rather certain interests which, either by express legal provision or by tacit understanding, ought to be considered as rights; and secondly, in each person's bearing his share (to be fixed on some equitable principle) of the labours and sacrifices incurred for defending the society or its members from injury and molestation. these conditions society is justified in enforcing, at all costs to those who endeavour to withhold fulfilment. nor is this all that society may do. the acts of an individual may be hurtful to others, or wanting in due consideration for their welfare, without going the length of violating any of their constituted rights. the offender may then be justly punished by opinion though not by law. as soon as any part of a person's conduct affects prejudicially the interests of others, society has jurisdiction over it, and the question whether the general welfare will or will not be promoted by interfering with it, becomes open to discussion. but there is no room for entertaining any such question when a person's conduct affects the interests of no persons besides himself, or needs not affect them unless they like (all the persons concerned being of full age, and the ordinary amount of understanding). in all such cases there should be perfect freedom, legal and social, to do the action and stand the consequences.
though society is not founded on a contract, and though no good purpose is served by inventing a contract in order to infer social obligations from it, everyone who receives the protection of society owes society something in return for this benefit, and the sheer fact that they have a society makes it indispensable that each should be bound to conform to a certain line of conduct towards the rest. this conduct consists in two things. (1) not harming the interests of one another; or, rather, not harming certain particular interests which ought to be classified (by explicit law or tacit understanding) as rights. (2) doing one's share (to be fixed by some fair principle) of the labours and sacrifices incurred for defending the society or its members from injury and harassment. society is justified in enforcing these conditions at the expense of those who try to avoid fulfilling them. nor is this all that society may do. the acts of an individual may be hurtful to others, or lacking in proper consideration for their welfare, without going so far as violating any of their constituted rights. the offender may then be justly punished by opinion, though not by law. as soon as any part of a person's conduct has a negative effect on the interests of others, society has jurisdiction over it, and the question whether or not the general welfare will be promoted by interfering with it becomes open to discussion. but there is no room for raising any such question when a person's conduct affects the interests of no-one but himself, or needn't affect others unless they want it to (all the persons concerned being adults with the ordinary amount of understanding). in all such cases there should be perfect freedom, legal and social, to perform the action and accept the consequences.

it would be a great misunderstanding of this doctrine, to suppose that it is one of selfish indifference, which pretends that human beings have no business with each other's conduct in life, and that they should not concern themselves about the well-doing or well-being of one another, unless their own interest is involved. instead of any diminution, there is need of a great increase of disinterested exertion to promote the good of others. but disinterested benevolence can find other instruments to persuade people to their good, than whips and scourges, either of the literal or the metaphorical sort. i am the last person to undervalue the self-regarding virtues; they are only second in importance, if even second, to the social. it is equally the business of education to cultivate both. but even education works by conviction and persuasion as well as by compulsion, and it is by the former only that, when the period of education is past, the self-regarding virtues should be inculcated. human beings owe to each other help to distinguish the better from the worse, and encouragement to choose the former and avoid the latter. they should be for ever stimulating each other to increased exercise of their higher faculties, and increased direction of their feelings and aims towards wise instead of foolish, elevating instead of degrading, objects and contemplations. but neither one person, nor any number of persons, is warranted in saying to another human creature of ripe years, that he shall not do with his life for his own benefit what he chooses to do with it. he is the person most interested in his own well-being: the interest which any other person, except in cases of strong personal attachment, can have in it, is trifling, compared with that which he himself has; the interest which society has in him individually (except as to his conduct to others) is fractional, and altogether indirect: while, with respect to his own feelings and circumstances, the most ordinary man or woman has means of knowledge immeasurably surpassing those that can be possessed by any one else. the interference of society to overrule his judgment and purposes in what only regards himself, must be grounded on general presumptions; which may be altogether wrong, and even if right, are as likely as not to be misapplied to individual cases, by persons no better acquainted with the circumstances of such cases than those are who look at them merely from without. in this department, therefore, of human affairs, individuality has its proper field of action. in the conduct of human beings towards one another, it is necessary that general rules should for the most part be observed, in order that people may know what they have to expect; but in each person's own concerns, his individual spontaneity is entitled to free exercise. considerations to aid his judgment, exhortations to strengthen his will, may be offered to him, even obtruded on him, by others; but he himself is the final judge. all errors which he is likely to commit against advice and warning, are far outweighed by the evil of allowing others to constrain him to what they deem his good.
it would be a great misunderstanding of this doctrine to suppose that it is one of selfish indifference, claiming that human beings have no concern with each other's behaviour and shouldn't concern themselves about one anothers welldoing or well-being unless their own interests are involved. instead of any lessening there is need for a great increase of disinterested effort to promote the good of others. but it is one thing to act on one's belief that it would be better for x himself if he didn't do y and another to bring legal or social pressure on him not to do y. for persuading people to look after themselves, disinterested benevolence can find instruments other than whips and scourges, whether of the literal or the metaphorical sort. i am the last person to undervalue the self-regarding virtues; they are second in importance only to the social virtues, if not first equal with them. it is equally the business of education to cultivate both. but even education works by conviction and persuasion as well as by compulsion; and once the period of education is past, it is only by conviction and persuasion that the self-regarding virtues should be instilled into people. human beings owe to each other help to distinguish the better from the worse, and encouragement to choose the former and avoid the latter. they should be forever stimulating each other to increased exercise of their higher faculties, and increased direction of their feelings and aims towards things and thoughts that are wise instead of foolish, elevating instead of degrading. but no one person or group is entitled to say to another adult human being that he shall not do with his life for his own benefit what he chooses to do with it. he is the person most interested in his own well-being; except in cases of strong personal attachment, the interest that anyone else can have in it is trifling compared with his own; and society's interest in him as an individual (except with regard to his conduct toward others) is fractional and altogether indirect. and there is also a point about the knowledge on which interference would have to be based. the most ordinary man or woman has means of knowledge concerning his own feelings and circumstances that immeasurably surpass those that anyone else can have. the interference of society to overrule his judgment and purposes in what affects only himself must be based not on knowledge about him in particular but on general presumptions about people as a whole; these general presumptions may be altogether wrong, and even when they are right they are as likely as not to be misapplied to individual cases. (remember that the application is being made to someone by other people, who therefore don't know much about the circumstances of the case). in this department of human affairs, therefore, individuality has its proper field of action. in the conduct of human beings towards one another, it is necessary that general rules should for the most part be observed so that people can know what to expect; but in each person's own concerns, his individual spontaneity is entitled to free exercise. considerations to aid his judgment, urgings to strengthen his will, may be offered to him, even pushed at him, by others; but he is the final judge. any errors that he is likely to commit against advice and warning are far outweighed by the evil of allowing others to constrain him to what they think to be his good.

i do not mean that the feelings with which a person is regarded by others, ought not to be in any way affected by his self-regarding qualities or deficiencies. this is neither possible nor desirable. if he is eminent in any of the qualities which conduce to his own good, he is, so far, a proper object of admiration. he is so much the nearer to the ideal perfection of human nature. if he is grossly deficient in those qualities, a sentiment the opposite of admiration will follow. there is a degree of folly, and a degree of what may be called (though the phrase is not unobjectionable) lowness or depravation of taste, which, though it cannot justify doing harm to the person who manifests it, renders him necessarily and properly a subject of distaste, or, in extreme cases, even of contempt: a person could not have the opposite qualities in due strength without entertaining these feelings. though doing no wrong to any one, a person may so act as to compel us to judge him, and feel to him, as a fool, or as a being of an inferior order: and since this judgment and feeling are a fact which he would prefer to avoid, it is doing him a service to warn him of it beforehand, as of any other disagreeable consequence to which he exposes himself. it would be well, indeed, if this good office were much more freely rendered than the common notions of politeness at present permit, and if one person could honestly point out to another that he thinks him in fault, without being considered unmannerly or presuming. we have a right, also, in various ways, to act upon our unfavourable opinion of any one, not to the oppression of his individuality, but in the exercise of ours. we are not bound, for example, to seek his society; we have a right to avoid it (though not to parade the avoidance), for we have a right to choose the society most acceptable to us. we have a right, and it may be our duty, to caution others against him, if we think his example or conversation likely to have a pernicious effect on those with whom he associates. we may give others a preference over him in optional good offices, except those which tend to his improvement. in these various modes a person may suffer very severe penalties at the hands of others, for faults which directly concern only himself; but he suffers these penalties only in so far as they are the natural, and, as it were, the spontaneous consequences of the faults themselves, not because they are purposely inflicted on him for the sake of punishment. a person who shows rashness, obstinacy, self-conceit who cannot live within moderate means who cannot restrain himself from hurtful indulgences who pursues animal pleasures at the expense of those of feeling and intellect must expect to be lowered in the opinion of others, and to have a less share of their favourable sentiments; but of this he has no right to complain, unless he has merited their favour by special excellence in his social relations, and has thus established a title to their good offices, which is not affected by his demerits towards himself.
i don't mean that a person's self-regarding qualities or deficiencies oughtn't to affect how others regard him. that is neither possible nor desirable. if he is conspicuous in any of the qualities that conduce to his own good, he is to that extent a proper object of admiration. he is that much nearer to the ideal perfection of human nature. if he is grossly lacking in those qualities, a sentiment the opposite of admiration will follow. there is a degree of folly, and a degree of what may be called (though the phrase is somewhat objectionable) lowness or depravity of taste, which though it can't justify harming the person who manifests it makes him necessarily and properly the object of distaste and in extreme cases the object of contempt; anyone who has the opposite qualities in due strength would have to have these feelings. though not doing wrong to anyone else, a person may so act as to compel us to judge him to be a fool or a being of some inferior kind, and to feel towards him in that way; and since this judgment and feeling are a fact that he would prefer to avoid, it is doing him a service to warn him of it beforehand, as it would be to warn him of any other disagreeable consequence to which he is exposing himself. it would indeed be a good thing if this service were given much more freely than the common notions of politeness at present permit, and if one person could honestly point out to another that he thinks him at fault, without being considered pushy or bad-mannered. we also have a right in various ways to act on our unfavourable opinion of anyone, not oppressing his individuality but exercising ours. we are not bound, for example, to seek his society; we have a right to avoid it (though not to parade the avoidance), for we have a right to choose the society most acceptable to us. we have a right and possibly even a duty to warn others against him if we think his example or conversation likely to have a bad effect on those with whom he associates. when we have at our disposal various possibilities of giving help, we may give others the preference over him unless it is a question of helping him to improve. in these different ways a person may suffer very severe penalties at the hands of others for faults that directly concern only himself; but he suffers these penalties only as natural and spontaneous consequences of the faults themselves, not because they are purposely inflicted on him for the sake of punishment. a person who shows rashness, obstinacy, self-conceit, can't live within moderate means, can't restrain himself from hurtful indulgences, and pursues animal pleasures at the expense of those of feeling and intellect, must expect to be lowered in the opinion of others, and to have a smaller share of their favourable sentiments; has no right to complain of this unless he has deserved their favour by special excellence in his social relations, thus establishing a right to help from them a right that isn't affected by how badly he treats himself.

what i contend for is, that the inconveniences which are strictly inseparable from the unfavourable judgment of others, are the only ones to which a person should ever be subjected for that portion of his conduct and character which concerns his own good, but which does not affect the interests of others in their relations with him. acts injurious to others require a totally different treatment. encroachment on their rights; infliction on them of any loss or damage not justified by his own rights; falsehood or duplicity in dealing with them; unfair or ungenerous use of advantages over them; even selfish abstinence from defending them against injury these are fit objects of moral reprobation, and, in grave cases, of moral retribution and punishment. and not only these acts, but the dispositions which lead to them, are properly immoral, and fit subjects of disapprobation which may rise to abhorrence. cruelty of disposition; malice and ill-nature; that most anti-social and odious of all passions, envy; dissimulation and insincerity; irascibility on insufficient cause, and resentment disproportioned to the provocation; the love of domineering over others; the desire to engross more than one's share of advantages (the of the greeks); the pride which derives gratification from the abasement of others; the egotism which thinks self and its concerns more important than everything else, and decides all doubtful questions in its own favour; these are moral vices, and constitute a bad and odious moral character: unlike the self-regarding faults previously mentioned, which are not properly immoralities, and to whatever pitch they may be carried, do not constitute wickedness. they may be proofs of any amount of folly, or want of personal dignity and self-respect; but they are only a subject of moral reprobation when they involve a breach of duty to others, for whose sake the individual is bound to have care for himself. what are called duties to ourselves are not socially obligatory, unless circumstances render them at the same time duties to others. the term duty to oneself, when it means anything more than prudence, means self-respect or self-development; and for none of these is any one accountable to his fellow-creatures, because for none of them is it for the good of mankind that he be held accountable to them.
what i contend for is this: with regard to the part of someone's conduct and character that concerns his own good but doesn't affect the interests of others in their relations with him, the only inconveniences that he should be subject to are ones that are strictly inseparable from the unfavourable judgment of others. acts injurious to others require a totally different treatment. encroachment on the rights of other, infliction on them of any loss or damage not justified by his own rights, falsehood or trickery in dealing with them, unfair or ungenerous use of advantages over them, even selfish abstinence from defending them against harm these are fit objects of moral reproach and, in serious cases, of moral retribution and punishment. and not only these acts but also the dispositions that lead to them are strictly immoral, and are fit objects of disapproval that may rise to the level of disgust. cruelty of disposition, malice and ill-nature, envy (that most anti-social and odious of all passions), hypocrisy and insincerity, irritability over trifles, immoderate resentment, the love of domineering over others, the desire to gather in more than one's share of advantages, the pride that is pleased when others fail, the egotism that thinks self and its concerns more important than everything else and decides all doubtful questions in his own favour these are moral vices, and constitute a bad and odious moral character. not so the self-regarding faults previously mentioned: they are not strictly immoralities, and don't constitute wickedness however intense they are. they may be proofs of any amount of folly or lack of personal dignity and self-respect; but they invite moral condemnation only when they involve a breach of duty to others for whose sake the individual is obliged to take care of himself. what are called duties to ourselves are not socially obligatory unless circumstances turn them into duties to others as well. the phrase duty to oneself, when it means anything more than prudence, means self-respect or self-development; and there is no it's-for-the-good-of-mankind reason why anyone should be held accountable to his fellow-creatures for either of them.

the distinction between the loss of consideration which a person may rightly incur by defect of prudence or of personal dignity, and the reprobation which is due to him for an offence against the rights of others, is not a merely nominal distinction. it makes a vast difference both in our feelings and in our conduct towards him, whether he displeases us in things in which we think we have a right to control him, or in things in which we know that we have not. if he displeases us, we may express our distaste, and we may stand aloof from a person as well as from a thing that displeases us; but we shall not therefore feel called on to make his life uncomfortable. we shall reflect that he already bears, or will bear, the whole penalty of his error; if he spoils his life by mismanagement, we shall not, for that reason, desire to spoil it still further: instead of wishing to punish him, we shall rather endeavour to alleviate his punishment, by showing him how he may avoid or cure the evils his conduct tends to bring upon him. he may be to us an object of pity, perhaps of dislike, but not of anger or resentment; we shall not treat him like an enemy of society: the worst we shall think ourselves justified in doing is leaving him to himself, if we do not interfere benevolently by showing interest or concern for him. it is far otherwise if he has infringed the rules necessary for the protection of his fellow-creatures, individually or collectively. the evil consequences of his acts do not then fall on himself, but on others; and society, as the protector of all its members, must retaliate on him; must inflict pain on him for the express purpose of punishment, and must take care that it be sufficiently severe. in the one case, he is an offender at our bar, and we are called on not only to sit in judgment on him, but, in one shape or another, to execute our own sentence: in the other case, it is not our part to inflict any suffering on him, except what may incidentally follow from our using the same liberty in the regulation of our own affairs, which we allow to him in his.
the distinction between the loss of regard that a person may rightly incur through a lack of prudence or of personal dignity and the condemnation that is due to him for an offence against the rights of others, is not a merely verbal one. it makes a vast difference both in our feelings and in our conduct towards him, whether he displeases us in things in which we think we have a right to control him, or displeases us in things in which we know we haven't. if he displeases us, we may express our distaste, and we may keep our distance from a person as well as from a thing that displeases us; but we shan't therefore feel called on to make his life uncomfortable. we shall reflect that he already bears, or will bear, the whole penalty of his error. if he spoils his life by mismanagement, that won't lead us to want to spoil it still further: instead of wishing to punish him, we'll try to lighten his punishment, by showing him how to avoid or cure the evils that his conduct tends to bring on him. he may be to us an object of pity, perhaps of dislike, but not of anger or resentment; we shan't treat him like an enemy of society; the worst we shall think ourselves justified in doing is leaving him to himself, if we don't interfere benevolently by showing interest or concern for him. the situation is entire different if he has infringed the rules necessary for the protection of his fellow-creatures, individually or collectively. the evil consequences of his acts don't then fall on himself but on others; and society, as the protector of all its members, must strike back at him, inflicting pain on him for the express purpose of punishment, and must take care that the pain is sufficiently severe. in this latter case he is an offender in our court, and we are called on not only to sit in judgment on him but, in one way or another, to carry out our own sentence; whereas in the former case it is not our role to inflict any suffering on him except what may incidentally follow from our using the same liberty in the regulation of our own affairs that we allow him in his.

the distinction here pointed out between the part of a person's life which concerns only himself, and that which concerns others, many persons will refuse to admit. how (it may be asked) can any part of the conduct of a member of society be a matter of indifference to the other members? no person is an entirely isolated being; it is impossible for a person to do anything seriously or permanently hurtful to himself, without mischief reaching at least to his near connections, and often far beyond them. if he injures his property, he does harm to those who directly or indirectly derived support from it, and usually diminishes, by a greater or less amount, the general resources of the community. if he deteriorates his bodily or mental faculties, he not only brings evil upon all who depended on him for any portion of their happiness, but disqualifies himself for rendering the services which he owes to his fellow-creatures generally; perhaps becomes a burthen on their affection or benevolence; and if such conduct were very frequent, hardly any offence that is committed would detract more from the general sum of good. finally, if by his vices or follies a person does no direct harm to others, he is nevertheless (it may be said) injurious by his example; and ought to be compelled to control himself, for the sake of those whom the sight or knowledge of his conduct might corrupt or mislead.
many people will deny that we can distinguish the part of a person's life that concerns only himself from the part that concerns others. they may say: how can any part of the conduct of a member of society be a matter of indifference to the other members? no person is an entirely isolated being; it is impossible for a person to do anything seriously or permanently hurtful to himself without harm coming at least to those closely connected with him and often far beyond them. if he injures his property, he does harm to those who directly or indirectly derived support from it, and usually lessens somewhat the general resources of the community. if he worsens his physical or mental abilities, he not only brings evil on all who depended on him for any portion of their happiness but makes himself unable to render the services that he owes to his fellow-creatures generally; perhaps becomes a burden on their affection or benevolence. finally, if by his vices or follies a person does no direct harm to others, he nevertheless does do harm by the example he sets, and he ought to be compelled to control himself, for the sake of those whom the sight or knowledge of his conduct might corrupt or mislead.

and even (it will be added) if the consequences of misconduct could be confined to the vicious or thoughtless individual, ought society to abandon to their own guidance those who are manifestly unfit for it? if protection against themselves is confessedly due to children and persons under age, is not society equally bound to afford it to persons of mature years who are equally incapable of self-government? if gambling, or drunkenness, or incontinence, or idleness, or uncleanliness, are as injurious to happiness, and as great a hindrance to improvement, as many or most of the acts prohibited by law, why (it may be asked) should not law, so far as is consistent with practicability and social convenience, endeavour to repress these also? and as a supplement to the unavoidable imperfections of law, ought not opinion at least to organise a powerful police against these vices, and visit rigidly with social penalties those who are known to practise them? there is no question here (it may be said) about restricting individuality, or impeding the trial of new and original experiments in living. the only things it is sought to prevent are things which have been tried and condemned from the beginning of the world until now; things which experience has shown not to be useful or suitable to any person's individuality. there must be some length of time and amount of experience, after which a moral or prudential truth may be regarded as established: and it is merely desired to prevent generation after generation from falling over the same precipice which has been fatal to their predecessors.
and even if the consequences of misconduct could be confined to the vicious or thoughtless individual himself, ought society to abandon to their own guidance those who are manifestly unfit for it? we all agree that children and young people should be protected against themselves; so isn't society equally bound to protect against themselves adults who are equally incapable of self-government? if gambling, or drunkenness, or sexual licence, or idleness, or uncleanliness, are as injurious to happiness and as great a hindrance to improvement as many or most of the acts prohibited by law, why shouldn't the law try to put them down also (as far as practicability and social convenience allow)? and as a supplement to the unavoidable imperfections of law, oughtn't public opinion at least to organize a powerful guard against these vices, and rigorously apply social penalties on those who are known to practise them? there is no question here of restricting individuality or blocking trials of new and original experiments in living. nothing is being prevented except things that have been tried and condemned from the beginning of the world until now things that experience has shown not to be useful or suitable to any person's individuality. there must be some length of time and amount of experience after which a moral or prudential truth can be regarded as established! all that is proposed here is to prevent generation after generation from falling over the same precipice that has been fatal to their predecessors.

i fully admit that the mischief which a person does to himself, may seriously affect, both through their sympathies and their interests, those nearly connected with him, and in a minor degree, society at large. when, by conduct of this sort, a person is led to violate a distinct and assignable obligation to any other person or persons, the case is taken out of the self-regarding class, and becomes amenable to moral disapprobation in the proper sense of the term. if, for example, a man, through intemperance or extravagance, becomes unable to pay his debts, or, having undertaken the moral responsibility of a family, becomes from the same cause incapable of supporting or educating them, he is deservedly reprobated, and might be justly punished; but it is for the breach of duty to his family or creditors, not for the extravagance. if the resources which ought to have been devoted to them, had been diverted from them for the most prudent investment, the moral culpability would have been the same. george barnwell murdered his uncle to get money for his mistress, but if he had done it to set himself up in business, he would equally have been hanged. again, in the frequent case of a man who causes grief to his family by addiction to bad habits, he deserves reproach for his unkindness or ingratitude; but so he may for cultivating habits not in themselves vicious, if they are painful to those with whom he passes his life, or who from personal ties are dependent on him for their comfort. whoever fails in the consideration generally due to the interests and feelings of others, not being compelled by some more imperative duty, or justified by allowable self-preference, is a subject of moral disapprobation for that failure, but not for the cause of it, nor for the errors, merely personal to himself, which may have remotely led to it. in like manner, when a person disables himself, by conduct purely self-regarding, from the performance of some definite duty incumbent on him to the public, he is guilty of a social offence. no person ought to be punished simply for being drunk; but a soldier or a policeman should be punished for being drunk on duty. whenever, in short, there is a definite damage, or a definite risk of damage, either to an individual or to the public, the case is taken out of the province of liberty, and placed in that of morality or law.
i fully admit that the harm a person does to himself may seriously affect (both through their sympathies and their interests) those closely connected with him, and may in a lesser degree affect society in general. when by conduct of this sort a person is led to violate a distinct and assignable obligation to one or more others, the case is no longer in self-regarding category and becomes amenable to moral condemnation in the proper sense of the term. for example: if through intemperance or extravagance a man becomes unable to pay his debts, or unable to support and educate his family, he is deservedly condemned and might be justly punished; but it is for the breach of duty to his family or creditors, not for the extravagance. if the resources that ought to have been devoted to them had been diverted from them for the most prudent investment, the moral culpability would have been the same. again, if (as often happens) a man causes grief to his family by his addiction to bad habits, he deserves reproach for his unkindness or ingratitude; but he may deserve it just as much if he causes grief to his family by cultivating habits that are not in themselves vicious. someone who fails in the consideration generally due to the interests and feelings of others, without being compelled by some more imperative duty orjustified by allowable self-preference, is a subject of moral disapproval for that failure, but not for the cause of it and not for any errors that are merely personal to himself and may have indirectly led to it. similarly, when a person disables himself through purely self-regarding conduct from the performance of some definite duty he has towards the public, he is guilty of a social offence. no-one ought to be punished simply for being drunk, but a soldier or a policeman should be punished for being drunk on duty. in short, whenever there is definite damage, or a definite risk of damage, either to an individual or to the public, the case is taken out of the domain of liberty and placed in that of morality or law.

but with regard to the merely contingent, or, as it may be called, constructive injury which a person causes to society, by conduct which neither violates any specific duty to the public, nor occasions perceptible hurt to any assignable individual except himself; the inconvenience is one which society can afford to bear, for the sake of the greater good of human freedom. if grown persons are to be punished for not taking proper care of themselves, i would rather it were for their own sake, than under pretence of preventing them from impairing their capacity of rendering to society benefits which society does not pretend it has a right to exact. but i cannot consent to argue the point as if society had no means of bringing its weaker members up to its ordinary standard of rational conduct, except waiting till they do something irrational, and then punishing them, legally or morally, for it. society has had absolute power over them during all the early portion of their existence: it has had the whole period of childhood and nonage in which to try whether it could make them capable of rational conduct in life. the existing generation is master both of the training and the entire circumstances of the generation to come; it cannot indeed make them perfectly wise and good, because it is itself so lamentably deficient in goodness and wisdom; and its best efforts are not always, in individual cases, its most successful ones; but it is perfectly well able to make the rising generation, as a whole, as good as, and a little better than, itself. if society lets any considerable number of its members grow up mere children, incapable of being acted on by rational consideration of distant motives, society has itself to blame for the consequences. armed not only with all the powers of education, but with the ascendency which the authority of a received opinion always exercises over the minds who are least fitted to judge for themselves; and aided by the natural penalties which cannot be prevented from falling on those who incur the distaste or the contempt of those who know them; let not society pretend that it needs, besides all this, the power to issue commands and enforce obedience in the personal concerns of individuals, in which, on all principles of justice and policy, the decision ought to rest with those who are to abide the consequences. nor is there anything which tends more to discredit and frustrate the better means of influencing conduct, than a resort to the worse. if there be among those whom it is attempted to coerce into prudence or temperance, any of the material of which vigorous and independent characters are made, they will infallibly rebel against the yoke. no such person will ever feel that others have a right to control him in his concerns, such as they have to prevent him from injuring them in theirs; and it easily comes to be considered a mark of spirit and courage to fly in the face of such usurped authority, and do with ostentation the exact opposite of what it enjoins; as in the fashion of grossness which succeeded, in the time of charles ii., to the fanatical moral intolerance of the puritans. with respect to what is said of the necessity of protecting society from the bad example set to others by the vicious or the self-indulgent; it is true that bad example may have a pernicious effect, especially the example of doing wrong to others with impunity to the wrong-doer. but we are now speaking of conduct which, while it does no wrong to others, is supposed to do great harm to the agent himself: and i do not see how those who believe this, can think otherwise than that the example, on the whole, must be more salutary than hurtful, since, if it displays the misconduct, it displays also the painful or degrading consequences which, if the conduct is justly censured, must be supposed to be in all or most cases attendant on it.
but with regard to the merely contingent harm that a person causes to society by conduct that doesn't violate any specific duty to the public or bring harm to any assignable individual except himself: this inconvenience is one that society can afford to bear for the sake of the greater good of human freedom. if adults are to be punished for not taking proper care of themselves, i would rather it were done for their own sake than done on the grounds that we are preventing them from impairing their ability to render to society benefits that society doesn't claim it has a right to demand! but i can't consent to argue the point as if society had no means of bringing its weaker members up to its ordinary standard of rational conduct, except waiting till they do something irrational and then punishing them legally or morally for it. society has had absolute power over them during all the early part of their existence; it has had the whole period of childhood and teen-age in which to try to make them capable of rational conduct in life. the existing adult generation is master both of the training and the entire circumstances of the generation to come. indeed it can't make them perfectly wise and good, because it is itself so lamentably short of goodness and wisdom; and its best efforts are not always, in individual cases, its most successful ones; but it is perfectly well able to make the rising generation, as a whole, as good as itself and a little better. if society lets any considerable number of its members grow up as mere children, incapable of being acted on by rational consideration of long-term consequences, society has itself to blame for the upshot. armed not only with all the powers of education but also with the dominance that the authority of a publicly accepted opinion always exercises over the minds of those who are least fitted to judge for themselves; and aided by the natural penalties that can't be prevented from falling on those who incur the distaste or the contempt of those who know them; let society not claim that besides all this it needs the power to issue commands and enforce obedience in the personal concerns of individuals concerns in which, on all principles of justice and policy, the decision ought to rest with those who will have to put up with the consequences. and nothing tends more to discredit and frustrate the better means of influencing conduct than a resort to the worse. if those whom we are trying coerce into prudence or temperance include any who are made of the same stuff as vigorous and independent characters, they will certainly rebel against the yoke. no such person will ever feel that others have a right to control him in his concerns the kind of right that they do have to prevent him from harming them in their concerns; and it easily comes to be considered a mark of spirit and courage to fly in the face of such illegitimate authority, ostentatiously doing the exact opposite of what it commands. an example was the fashion of grossness that followed, in the time of charles ii, the fanatical moral intolerance of the puritans. with respect to what is said about the need to protect society from the bad example set for others by the vicious or the self-indulgent: it is true that a bad example may have a pernicious effect, especially the example of doing wrong to others with impunity to the wrong-doer. but we are now speaking of conduct which, while doing no wrong to others, is supposed to do great harm to the agent himself; and i don't see how those who believe this can help thinking that the example must on the whole do more good than harm, because in displaying the misconduct it also displays the painful or degrading consequences which are supposed nearly always to flow from it.

but the strongest of all the arguments against the interference of the public with purely personal conduct, is that when it does interfere, the odds are that it interferes wrongly, and in the wrong place. on questions of social morality, of duty to others, the opinion of the public, that is, of an overruling majority, though often wrong, is likely to be still oftener right; because on such questions they are only required to judge of their own interests; of the manner in which some mode of conduct, if allowed to be practised, would affect themselves. but the opinion of a similar majority, imposed as a law on the minority, on questions of self-regarding conduct, is quite as likely to be wrong as right; for in these cases public opinion means, at the best, some people's opinion of what is good or bad for other people; while very often it does not even mean that; the public, with the most perfect indifference, passing over the pleasure or convenience of those whose conduct they censure, and considering only their own preference. there are many who consider as an injury to themselves any conduct which they have a distaste for, and resent it as an outrage to their feelings; as a religious bigot, when charged with disregarding the religious feelings of others, has been known to retort that they disregard his feelings, by persisting in their abominable worship or creed. but there is no parity between the feeling of a person for his own opinion, and the feeling of another who is offended at his holding it; no more than between the desire of a thief to take a purse, and the desire of the right owner to keep it. and a person's taste is as much his own peculiar concern as his opinion or his purse. it is easy for any one to imagine an ideal public, which leaves the freedom and choice of individuals in all uncertain matters undisturbed, and only requires them to abstain from modes of conduct which universal experience has condemned. but where has there been seen a public which set any such limit to its censorship? or when does the public trouble itself about universal experience? in its interferences with personal conduct it is seldom thinking of anything but the enormity of acting or feeling differently from itself; and this standard of judgment, thinly disguised, is held up to mankind as the dictate of religion and philosophy, by nine-tenths of all moralists and speculative writers. these teach that things are right because they are right; because we feel them to be so. they tell us to search in our own minds and hearts for laws of conduct binding on ourselves and on all others. what can the poor public do but apply these instructions, and make their own personal feelings of good and evil, if they are tolerably unanimous in them, obligatory on all the world?
but the strongest of all the arguments against the public's interfering with purely personal conduct is that when it does interfere the odds are that it interferes wrongly and in the wrong place. on questions of social morality of duty to others the opinion of the overruling majority is likely to be right oftener than it is wrong, because on such questions they are only required to judge how a given mode of conduct, if allowed to be practised, would affect their interests. but the opinion of a similar majority imposed as a law on the minority on questions of self-regarding conduct is quite as likely to be wrong as right; for in these cases public opinion means at best some people's opinion of what is good or bad for other people; while very often it doesn't even mean that, because the public consider only their own preference and don't pay the slightest regard to the pleasure or convenience of those whose conduct they censure. there are many who regard any conduct that they have a distaste for as an insult to themselves, and resent it as an outrage to their feelings; as a religious bigot, when accused of disregarding the religious feelings of others, has been known to reply that they disregard his feelings by persisting in their abominable worship or creed! but a person's feeling for his own opinion is not on a par with the feeling of someone else who is offended at his holding it; any more than a person's desire to keep his purse is on a par with a thief's desire to take it. someone's taste is as much his own particular concern as is his opinion or his purse. it is easy for anyone to imagine an ideal public which leaves individuals free to choose in all matters where there are two sides to the question, and only requires them to abstain from kinds of conduct that universal experience has condemned. but whoever saw a public that did set any such limit to its censorship? and when does the public trouble itself about universal experience? in its interferences with personal conduct the public is seldom thinking of anything but the dreadfulness of anyone's acting or feeling differently from itself ; and this standard of judgment is what ninety percent of all moralists and moral theorists hold up to mankind as the dictate of religion and philosophy. the standard in question is thinly disguised in the hands of these people. what they openly teach is that things are right because they are right because we feel them to be so. they tell us to search in our own minds and hearts for laws of conduct binding on ourselves and on all others. what can the poor public do but apply these instructions and make their own personal feelings of good and evil, if they are reasonably unanimous in them, obligatory on all the world?

the evil here pointed out is not one which exists only in theory; and it may perhaps be expected that i should specify the instances in which the public of this age and country improperly invests its own preferences with the character of moral laws. i am not writing an essay on the aberrations of existing moral feeling. that is too weighty a subject to be discussed parenthetically, and by way of illustration. yet examples are necessary, to show that the principle i maintain is of serious and practical moment, and that i am not endeavouring to erect a barrier against imaginary evils. and it is not difficult to show, by abundant instances, that to extend the bounds of what may be called moral police, until it encroaches on the most unquestionably legitimate liberty of the individual, is one of the most universal of all human propensities.
the evil that i am pointing out here isn't one that exists only in theory; and you may expect me to cite examples in which the public of this age and country improperly dresses up its own preferences as moral laws. i am not writing an essay on the aberrations of existing moral feeling, which is too weighty a subject to be discussed parenthetically and by way of illustration. but i do need to provide some examples, to show that the principle i maintain is of serious and practical significance, and that i am not trying to set up a barrier against imaginary evils. and it isn't hard to show by abundant examples that one of the most universal of all human tendencies is the tendency to extend the bounds of what may be called moral police until it encroaches on the most unquestionably legitimate liberty of the individual. examples of this will occupy the remainder of the present chapter.

as a first instance, consider the antipathies which men cherish on no better grounds than that persons whose religious opinions are different from theirs, do not practise their religious observances, especially their religious abstinences. to cite a rather trivial example, nothing in the creed or practice of christians does more to envenom the hatred of mahomedans against them, than the fact of their eating pork. there are few acts which christians and europeans regard with more unaffected disgust, than mussulmans regard this particular mode of satisfying hunger. it is, in the first place, an offence against their religion; but this circumstance by no means explains either the degree or the kind of their repugnance; for wine also is forbidden by their religion, and to partake of it is by all mussulmans accounted wrong, but not disgusting. their aversion to the flesh of the unclean beast is, on the contrary, of that peculiar character, resembling an instinctive antipathy, which the idea of uncleanness, when once it thoroughly sinks into the feelings, seems always to excite even in those whose personal habits are anything but scrupulously cleanly, and of which the sentiment of religious impurity, so intense in the hindoos, is a remarkable example. suppose now that in a people, of whom the majority were mussulmans, that majority should insist upon not permitting pork to be eaten within the limits of the country. this would be nothing new in mahomedan countries. would it be a legitimate exercise of the moral authority of public opinion? and if not, why not? the practice is really revolting to such a public. they also sincerely think that it is forbidden and abhorred by the deity. neither could the prohibition be censured as religious persecution. it might be religious in its origin, but it would not be persecution for religion, since nobody's religion makes it a duty to eat pork. the only tenable ground of condemnation would be, that with the personal tastes and self-regarding concerns of individuals the public has no business to interfere.
as a first instance, consider the hostilities that men feel on no better grounds than that persons whose religious opinions are different from theirs don't practise their religious observances, especially their religious abstinences. to cite a rather trivial example, nothing in the creed or practice of christians does more to make moslems hate them than the fact of their eating pork. there are few acts that christians and europeans regard with more sincere disgust than moslems regard this particular way of satisfying hunger. it is in the first place an offence against their religion; but this doesn't explain either the degree or the kind of their repugnance; for wine also is forbidden by their religion, and moslems all think it is wrong to drink wine, but they don't think it is disgusting. in contrast with that, their aversion to the flesh of the unclean beast has that special character like an instinctive revulsion which the idea of uncleanness, when once it thoroughly sinks into the feelings, seems always to excite even in those whose personal habits are anything but scrupulously clean. a remarkable example of this force of the idea of uncleanness is provided by the sentiment of religious impurity that is so intense in the hindus. suppose now that in a people of whom the majority were moslems, that majority were to insist on not permitting pork to be eaten within the limits of the country. this would be nothing new in moslem countries. would it be a legitimate exercise of the moral authority of public opinion? and if not, why not? the practice is really revolting to such a public. they also sincerely think that it is forbidden and abhorred by god. neither could the prohibition be censured as religious persecution. it might be religious in its origin, but it wouldn't be persecution for religion, since nobody's religion makes it a duty to eat pork. the only tenable ground for condemning it would be that the public has no business interfering with the personal tastes and self-regarding concerns of individuals.

to come somewhat nearer home: the majority of spaniards consider it a gross impiety, offensive in the highest degree to the supreme being, to worship him in any other manner than the roman catholic; and no other public worship is lawful on spanish soil. the people of all southern europe look upon a married clergy as not only irreligious, but unchaste, indecent, gross, disgusting. what do protestants think of these perfectly sincere feelings, and of the attempt to enforce them against non-catholics? yet, if mankind are justified in interfering with each other's liberty in things which do not concern the interests of others, on what principle is it possible consistently to exclude these cases? or who can blame people for desiring to suppress what they regard as a scandal in the sight of god and man? no stronger case can be shown for prohibiting anything which is regarded as a personal immorality, than is made out for suppressing these practices in the eyes of those who regard them as impieties; and unless we are willing to adopt the logic of persecutors, and to say that we may persecute others because we are right, and that they must not persecute us because they are wrong, we must beware of admitting a principle of which we should resent as a gross injustice the application to ourselves.
to come somewhat nearer home: the majority of spaniards consider it a gross impiety, offensive in the highest degree to the supreme being, to worship him in any but the roman catholic way; and no other public worship is lawful on spanish soil. the people of all southern europe look on a married clergy as not only irreligious, but unchaste, indecent, gross, disgusting. what do protestants think of these perfectly sincere feelings, and of the attempt to enforce them against non-catholics? yet, if mankind are justified in interfering with each other's liberty in things that don't concern the interests of others, on what principle is it possible consistently to exclude these cases? or who can blame people for wanting to suppress what they regard as a scandal in the sight of god and man? no stronger case can be shown for prohibiting anything that is regarded as a personal immorality than is made out for suppressing these practices in the eyes of those who regard them as impieties; and unless we are willing to adopt the logic of persecutors, and to say that we may persecute others because we are right and that they must not persecute us because they are wrong, we must beware of admitting a principle whose application to ourselves we would resent as a gross injustice.

the preceding instances may be objected to, although unreasonably, as drawn from contingencies impossible among us: opinion, in this country, not being likely to enforce abstinence from meats, or to interfere with people for worshipping, and for either marrying or not marrying, according to their creed or inclination. the next example, however, shall be taken from an interference with liberty which we have by no means passed all danger of. wherever the puritans have been sufficiently powerful, as in new england, and in great britain at the time of the commonwealth, they have endeavoured, with considerable success, to put down all public, and nearly all private, amusements: especially music, dancing, public games, or other assemblages for purposes of diversion, and the theatre. there are still in this country large bodies of persons by whose notions of morality and religion these recreations are condemned; and those persons belonging chiefly to the middle class, who are the ascendant power in the present social and political condition of the kingdom, it is by no means impossible that persons of these sentiments may at some time or other command a majority in parliament. how will the remaining portion of the community like to have the amusements that shall be permitted to them regulated by the religious and moral sentiments of the stricter calvinists and methodists? would they not, with considerable peremptoriness, desire these intrusively pious members of society to mind their own business? this is precisely what should be said to every government and every public, who have the pretension that no person shall enjoy any pleasure which they think wrong. but if the principle of the pretension be admitted, no one can reasonably object to its being acted on in the sense of the majority, or other preponderating power in the country; and all persons must be ready to conform to the idea of a christian commonwealth, as understood by the early settlers in new england, if a religious profession similar to theirs should ever succeed in regaining its lost ground, as religions supposed to be declining have so often been known to do.
those examples may be objected to, although unreasonably, as drawn from situations that couldn't arise among us, because in this country public opinion isn't likely to enforce abstinence from meats, or to interfere with people for worshipping, and for either marrying or not marrying, according to their creed or inclination. my next example, however, will involve an interference with liberty that we have by no means passed all danger of. wherever the puritans have been sufficiently powerful, as in new england and in great britain at the time of cromwell they have tried with considerable success to put down all public amusements and nearly all private ones especially music, dancing, public games and other gatherings for purposes of amusement, and the theatre. in this country there are still many people whose notions of morality and religion condemn these recreations; and those people belong chiefly to the middle class, which is the dominant power in the present social and political condition of the kingdom, so that it is by no means impossible that people with these views may some day command a majority in parliament. how will the rest of the community like having the amusements that shall be permitted to them regulated by the religious and moral sentiments of the stricter calvinists and methodists? wouldn't they pretty abruptly tell these intrusively pious members of society to mind their own business? well, that is precisely what should be said to every government and every public who claim that no person shall enjoy any pleasure that they think is wrong. once the principle of that claim is admitted, no-one can reasonably object to its being acted on in the spirit of the majority, or of other dominant power in the country; and everyone must be ready to conform to the idea of a christian commonwealth as understood by the early settlers in new england, if a religious creed similar to theirs should ever succeed in regaining its lost ground. and religions supposed to be declining often have regained lost ground!

to imagine another contingency, perhaps more likely to be realised than the one last mentioned. there is confessedly a strong tendency in the modern world towards a democratic constitution of society, accompanied or not by popular political institutions. it is affirmed that in the country where this tendency is most completely realised where both society and the government are most democratic the united states the feeling of the majority, to whom any appearance of a more showy or costly style of living than they can hope to rival is disagreeable, operates as a tolerably effectual sumptuary law, and that in many parts of the union it is really difficult for a person possessing a very large income, to find any mode of spending it, which will not incur popular disapprobation. though such statements as these are doubtless much exaggerated as a representation of existing facts, the state of things they describe is not only a conceivable and possible, but a probable result of democratic feeling, combined with the notion that the public has a right to a veto on the manner in which individuals shall spend their incomes. we have only further to suppose a considerable diffusion of socialist opinions, and it may become infamous in the eyes of the majority to possess more property than some very small amount, or any income not earned by manual labour. opinions similar in principle to these, already prevail widely among the artisan class, and weigh oppressively on those who are amenable to the opinion chiefly of that class, namely, its own members. it is known that the bad workmen who form the majority of the operatives in many branches of industry, are decidedly of opinion that bad workmen ought to receive the same wages as good, and that no one ought to be allowed, through piecework or otherwise, to earn by superior skill or industry more than others can without it. and they employ a moral police, which occasionally becomes a physical one, to deter skilful workmen from receiving, and employers from giving, a larger remuneration for a more useful service. if the public have any jurisdiction over private concerns, i cannot see that these people are in fault, or that any individual's particular public can be blamed for asserting the same authority over his individual conduct, which the general public asserts over people in general.
here is another possibility, perhaps more likely to come about than the one last mentioned. we all know that there is a strong tendency in the modern world towards a democratic constitution of society, whether or not accompanied by democratic political institutions. let us then look at the united states, the country where this tendency is most completely realized the country where both society and the government are most democratic. it is said that there the feeling of the majority, who find disagreeable any appearance of a more showy or costly style of living than they can hope to rival, operates as a fairly effective expense-controlling law, and that in many parts of the union it is really difficult for a person with a very large income to find any way of spending it without being disapproved of by the people. this is said, and no doubt it is a much exaggerated account of the real facts; but the state of things it portrays is not only conceivable and possible, but is a probable result of democratic feeling combined with the notion that the public has a right of veto over how individuals shall spend their incomes. add to those two the supposition of a considerable spreading of socialist opinions, and it may become abominable in the eyes of the majority to possess more than a very little property or to have any income not earned by manual labour. opinions similar in principle to these already prevail widely among the artisan class to deter skillful workmen from receiving and employers from giving more pay for more useful service. if the public have any jurisdiction over private concerns, i can't see that these people are at fault, or that any individual's particular public can be blamed for asserting the same authority over his individual conduct as the general public asserts over people in general.

but, without dwelling upon supposititious cases, there are, in our own day, gross usurpations upon the liberty of private life actually practised, and still greater ones threatened with some expectation of success, and opinions proposed which assert an unlimited right in the public not only to prohibit by law everything which it thinks wrong, but in order to get at what it thinks wrong, to prohibit any number of things which it admits to be innocent.
but setting aside suppositious cases, in our own day gross intrusions on the liberty of private life are actually practised, still greater ones are threatened with some expectation of success, and opinions are presented that would give to the public an unlimited right not only to prohibit by law everything that it thinks wrong, but also, in order to get at what it thinks wrong, to prohibit any number of things that it admits to be innocent.

under the name of preventing intemperance, the people of one english colony, and of nearly half the united states, have been interdicted by law from making any use whatever of fermented drinks, except for medical purposes: for prohibition of their sale is in fact, as it is intended to be, prohibition of their use. and though the impracticability of executing the law has caused its repeal in several of the states which had adopted it, including the one from which it derives its name, an attempt has notwithstanding been commenced, and is prosecuted with considerable zeal by many of the professed philanthropists, to agitate for a similar law in this country. the association, or alliance as it terms itself, which has been formed for this purpose, has acquired some notoriety through the publicity given to a correspondence between its secretary and one of the very few english public men who hold that a politician's opinions ought to be founded on principles. lord stanley's share in this correspondence is calculated to strengthen the hopes already built on him, by those who know how rare such qualities as are manifested in some of his public appearances, unhappily are among those who figure in political life. the organ of the alliance, who would deeply deplore the recognition of any principle which could be wrested to justify bigotry and persecution, undertakes to point out the broad and impassable barrier which divides such principles from those of the association. all matters relating to thought, opinion, conscience, appear to me, he says, to be without the sphere of legislation; all pertaining to social act, habit, relation, subject only to a discretionary power vested in the state itself, and not in the individual, to be within it. no mention is made of a third class, different from either of these, viz. acts and habits which are not social, but individual; although it is to this class, surely, that the act of drinking fermented liquors belongs. selling fermented liquors, however, is trading, and trading is a social act. but the infringement complained of is not on the liberty of the seller, but on that of the buyer and consumer; since the state might just as well forbid him to drink wine, as purposely make it impossible for him to obtain it. the secretary, however, says, i claim, as a citizen, a right to legislate whenever my social rights are invaded by the social act of another. and now for the definition of these social rights. if anything invades my social rights, certainly the traffic in strong drink does. it destroys my primary right of security, by constantly creating and stimulating social disorder. it invades my right of equality, by deriving a profit from the creation of a misery, i am taxed to support. it impedes my right to free moral and intellectual development, by surrounding my path with dangers, and by weakening and demoralising society, from which i have a right to claim mutual aid and intercourse. a theory of social rights, the like of which probably never before found its way into distinct language being nothing short of this that it is the absolute social right of every individual, that every other individual shall act in every respect exactly as he ought; that whosoever fails thereof in the smallest particular, violates my social right, and entitles me to demand from the legislature the removal of the grievance. so monstrous a principle is far more dangerous than any single interference with liberty; there is no violation of liberty which it would not justify; it acknowledges no right to any freedom whatever, except perhaps to that of holding opinions in secret, without ever disclosing them: for the moment an opinion which i consider noxious, passes any one's lips, it invades all the social rights attributed to me by the alliance. the doctrine ascribes to all mankind a vested interest in each other's moral, intellectual, and even physical perfection, to be defined by each claimant according to his own standard.
under the name of preventing intemperance the people of one english colony and of nearly half the united states have been forbidden by law from making any use whatever of alcoholic drinks, except for medical purposes. prohibition of their sale, which is what is explicitly forbidden by law, is and is intended to be prohibition of their use. and though the impracticability of enforcing the law has caused its repeal in several of the states that had adopted it, including the one from which it derives its name, an attempt has nevertheless been started, and is pushed with considerable zeal by many of the professed philanthropists, to agitate for a similar law in this country. the association (or alliance as it terms itself) which has been formed for this purpose has acquired some notoriety through the publicity given to a correspondence between its secretary and one of the very few english public men who hold that a politician's opinions ought to be founded on principles. lord stanley's part in this correspondence should strengthen the hopes already built on him, by those who know how few of those who figure in political life have such qualities as are shown in some of his public appearances. the spokesman for the alliance, who would deeply deplore the recognition of any principle that could be wrenched around so as to justify bigotry and persecution, points out the broad and impassable barrier that divides such principles from those of his association. all matters relating to thought, opinion, conscience appear to me, he says, to lie outside the sphere of legislation; all matters pertaining to social acts and habits. appear to me to be within that sphere. he doesn't mention a third class, different from either of these, namely acts and habits that are not social but individual; although it is to this class, surely, that the act of drinking alcoholic liquors belongs. selling such liquors, however, is trading, and trading is a social act. but the infringement complained of is not on the liberty of the seller but on that of the buyer and consumer; since the state might just as well forbid him to drink wine as purposely make it impossible for him to obtain it. the secretary of the alliance, however, says: i claim as a citizen a right to legislate whenever my social rights are invaded by the social act of another. now for the definition of these social rights. if anything invades my social rights, certainly the traffic in strong drink does. it destroys my primary right of security by constantly creating and stimulating social disorder. it invades my right of equality by making a profit out of the creation of misery that i am taxed to support. it impedes my right to free moral and intellectual development by surrounding my path with dangers and by weakening and demoralizing society, from which i have a right to claim mutual aid and personal relationships. this is a theory of social rights the like of which has probably never before been stated clearly! it is nothing short of this: that it is my absolute social right that every other individual shall act in every respect exactly as he ought; that whoever fails in the least detail of this violates my social right and entitles me to demand that the legislature remove the grievance. so monstrous a principle is far more dangerous than any single interference with liberty; there is no violation of liberty that it wouldn't justify; it acknowledges no right to any freedom whatever, except perhaps the freedom to hold opinions in secret without ever disclosing them; for the moment an opinion that i consider poisonous passes anyone's lips it invades all the social rights attributed to me by the alliance. the doctrine ascribes to all mankind a vested interest in each other's moral, intellectual, and even physical perfection, to be defined by each claimant according to his own standard.

another important example of illegitimate interference with the rightful liberty of the individual, not simply threatened, but long since carried into triumphant effect, is sabbatarian legislation. without doubt, abstinence on one day in the week, so far as the exigencies of life permit, from the usual daily occupation, though in no respect religiously binding on any except jews, is a highly beneficial custom. and inasmuch as this custom cannot be observed without a general consent to that effect among the industrious classes, therefore, in so far as some persons by working may impose the same necessity on others, it may be allowable and right that the law should guarantee to each, the observance by others of the custom, by suspending the greater operations of industry on a particular day. but this justification, grounded on the direct interest which others have in each individual's observance of the practice, does not apply to the self-chosen occupations in which a person may think fit to employ his leisure; nor does it hold good, in the smallest degree, for legal restrictions on amusements. it is true that the amusement of some is the day's work of others; but the pleasure, not to say the useful recreation, of many, is worth the labour of a few, provided the occupation is freely chosen, and can be freely resigned. the operatives are perfectly right in thinking that if all worked on sunday, seven days work would have to be given for six days wages: but so long as the great mass of employments are suspended, the small number who for the enjoyment of others must still work, obtain a proportional increase of earnings; and they are not obliged to follow those occupations, if they prefer leisure to emolument. if a further remedy is sought, it might be found in the establishment by custom of a holiday on some other day of the week for those particular classes of persons. the only ground, therefore, on which restrictions on sunday amusements can be defended, must be that they are religiously wrong; a motive of legislation which never can be too earnestly protested against. deorum injuri diis cur. it remains to be proved that society or any of its officers holds a commission from on high to avenge any supposed offence to omnipotence, which is not also a wrong to our fellow-creatures. the notion that it is one man's duty that another should be religious, was the foundation of all the religious persecutions ever perpetrated, and if admitted, would fully justify them. though the feeling which breaks out in the repeated attempts to stop railway travelling on sunday, in the resistance to the opening of museums, and the like, has not the cruelty of the old persecutors, the state of mind indicated by it is fundamentally the same. it is a determination not to tolerate others in doing what is permitted by their religion, because it is not permitted by the persecutor's religion. it is a belief that god not only abominates the act of the misbeliever, but will not hold us guiltless if we leave him unmolested.
another important example of illegitimate interference with the rightful liberty of the individual, not simply threatened but long since carried into triumphant effect, is legislation concerning the sabbath. refraining from one's usual daily occupations on one day of the week, as far as is practically possible, is no doubt a highly beneficial custom, though it is in no respect religiously binding on any except jews. and it can't be followed without a general consent to that effect among the classes of people with jobs to do, because if some people follow it, that compels others to do so. it may therefore be allowable and right that the law should guarantee to each person the observance by others of the custom in question, by suspending the large-scale operations of the economy on a particular day. but this justification is based on the direct interest that others have in each individual's observance of the practice; so it doesn't apply to the leisure-time occupations that a person chooses to engage in; nor does it hold good, in the slightest degree, for legal restrictions on amusements. it is true that the amusement of some is the day's work of others; but the labour of a few is compensated for by the pleasure of the many (and by the good their recreation does for them), provided that the few freely choose their work and are free to give it up. the workers are perfectly right in thinking that if everyone worked on sunday, seven days work would have to be given for six days wages: but so long as the great mass of employments are suspended, the small number who must still work for the enjoyment of others obtain a proportional increase of earnings; and they aren't obliged to follow those occupations if they would rather have leisure than pay. if a further remedy is sought, it might be found in the establishment by custom of a holiday on some other day of the week for those particular classes of persons. so the only ground on which restrictions on sunday amusements can be defended must be that they are religiously wrong; and this is a motive of legislation that never can be too earnestly protested against. injuries to the gods are the gods business. it remains to be proved that society or anyone acting for it has been appointed by heaven to avenge any supposed offence to god that isn't also a wrong to our fellow-creatures. the notion that it is one man's duty that another should be religious was the basis for all the religious persecutions ever perpetrated, and if it were right it would fully justify them. the feeling that breaks out in the repeated attempts to stop railway travel on sunday, in the resistance to the opening of museums, and the like, doesn't have the cruelty of the persecutors of old, but the state of mind indicated by it is fundamentally the same as theirs. it is a determination not to tolerate others in doing what is permitted by their religion, because it isn't permitted by the persecutor's religion. it is a belief that god not only abominates the act of the misbeliever but will blame us if we don't interfere with him.

i cannot refrain from adding to these examples of the little account commonly made of human liberty, the language of downright persecution which breaks out from the press of this country, whenever it feels called on to notice the remarkable phenomenon of mormonism. much might be said on the unexpected and instructive fact, that an alleged new revelation, and a religion founded on it, the product of palpable imposture, not even supported by the prestige of extraordinary qualities in its founder, is believed by hundreds of thousands, and has been made the foundation of a society, in the age of newspapers, railways, and the electric telegraph. what here concerns us is, that this religion, like other and better religions, has its martyrs; that its prophet and founder was, for his teaching, put to death by a mob; that others of its adherents lost their lives by the same lawless violence; that they were forcibly expelled, in a body, from the country in which they first grew up; while, now that they have been chased into a solitary recess in the midst of a desert, many in this country openly declare that it would be right (only that it is not convenient) to send an expedition against them, and compel them by force to conform to the opinions of other people. the article of the mormonite doctrine which is the chief provocative to the antipathy which thus breaks through the ordinary restraints of religious tolerance, is its sanction of polygamy; which, though permitted to mahomedans, and hindoos, and chinese, seems to excite unquenchable animosity when practised by persons who speak english, and profess to be a kind of christians. no one has a deeper disapprobation than i have of this mormon institution; both for other reasons, and because, far from being in any way countenanced by the principle of liberty, it is a direct infraction of that principle, being a mere riveting of the chains of one half of the community, and an emancipation of the other from reciprocity of obligation towards them. still, it must be remembered that this relation is as much voluntary on the part of the women concerned in it, and who may be deemed the sufferers by it, as is the case with any other form of the marriage institution; and however surprising this fact may appear, it has its explanation in the common ideas and customs of the world, which teaching women to think marriage the one thing needful, make it intelligible that many a woman should prefer being one of several wives, to not being a wife at all. other countries are not asked to recognise such unions, or release any portion of their inhabitants from their own laws on the score of mormonite opinions. but when the dissentients have conceded to the hostile sentiments of others, far more than could justly be demanded; when they have left the countries to which their doctrines were unacceptable, and established themselves in a remote corner of the earth, which they have been the first to render habitable to human beings; it is difficult to see on what principles but those of tyranny they can be prevented from living there under what laws they please, provided they commit no aggression on other nations, and allow perfect freedom of departure to those who are dissatisfied with their ways. a recent writer, in some respects of considerable merit, proposes (to use his own words), not a crusade, but a civilizade, against this polygamous community, to put an end to what seems to him a retrograde step in civilisation. it also appears so to me, but i am not aware that any community has a right to force another to be civilised. so long as the sufferers by the bad law do not invoke assistance from other communities, i cannot admit that persons entirely unconnected with them ought to step in and require that a condition of things with which all who are directly interested appear to be satisfied, should be put an end to because it is a scandal to persons some thousands of miles distant, who have no part or concern in it. let them send missionaries, if they please, to preach against it; and let them, by any fair means (of which silencing the teachers is not one), oppose the progress of similar doctrines among their own people. if civilisation has got the better of barbarism when barbarism had the world to itself, it is too much to profess to be afraid lest barbarism, after having been fairly got under, should revive and conquer civilisation. a civilisation that can thus succumb to its vanquished enemy, must first have become so degenerate, that neither its appointed priests and teachers, nor anybody else, has the capacity, or will take the trouble, to stand up for it. if this be so, the sooner such a civilisation receives notice to quit, the better. it can only go on from bad to worse, until destroyed and regenerated (like the western empire) by energetic barbarians.
to these examples of the small regard that is commonly paid to human liberty, i can't help adding one more: the language of downright persecution that breaks out from the press of this country whenever it feels called on to say something about the remarkable phenomenon of mormonism. much might be said concerning the unexpected and instructive fact that an alleged new revelation and a religion based on it, the product of obvious fraud and not even supported by the prestige of extraordinary qualities in its founder, is believed by hundreds of thousands of people and has been made the foundation of a whole society in the age of newspapers, railways, and the electric telegraph! what here concerns us is that this religion, like other and better ones, has its martyrs; that its prophet and founder was, for his teaching, put to death by a mob; that others of its adherents lost their lives by the same lawless violence; that they were forcibly expelled, in a body, from the territory in which they first grew up; and now that they have been chased into a solitary recess in the middle of a desert, many in this country openly declare that it would be right (though not convenient) to send an expedition against them to compel them by force to conform to the opinions of other people. the item in the mormon doctrine that chiefly arouses the hostility that thus breaks through the ordinary restraints of religious tolerance is its acceptance of polygamy. though permitted to moslems, hindus, and chinese, this seems to arouse unquenchable animosity when practised by people who speak english and claim to be some kind of christian. no-one disapproves of this mormon institution of polygamy more deeply than i do. far from being in any way countenanced by the principle of liberty, it is a direct infraction of that principle, being a mere riveting of the chains of one half of the community, while freeing the other half from having an obligation running the other way; and there are other reasons against it also. still, it must be remembered that this relation is as much voluntary on the part of the women concerned in it (who may be regarded as its victims) as is the case with any other form of the marriage institution. this may seem surprising, but it has its explanation in the common ideas and customs of the world, which teach women to think of marriage as the one thing they need. that makes it intelligible that many a woman should prefer being one of several wives to not being a wife at all. other countries are not asked to recognize such unions, or to release any portion of their inhabitants from their own laws on the grounds that they have mormon beliefs. but when the dissentients the mormons have conceded to the hostile attitudes of others far more than those others were entitled to demand, and when they have left the territories where their doctrines were unacceptable, and settled in a remote corner of the earth that they have been the first to make habitable to human beings, it's hard to see on what principles but those of tyranny they can be prevented from living there under what laws they please, provided they commit no aggression against other nations and allow perfect freedom of departure to those who are dissatisfied with their ways. a recent writer who is in some respects a person of considerable merit proposes not a crusade but what he calls a civilizade against this polygamous community, to put an end to what seems to him a step backwards in civilization. to me too that is what it seems to be, but i'm not aware that any community has the right to force another to be civilized. as long as those who suffer through the bad law don't call for help from other communities, i can't accept that persons entirely unconnected with them ought to step in and require that a condition of things with which all who are directly involved appear to be satisfied should be put an end to because it scandalizes people some thousands of miles away, people who have no part or concern in it. let them send missionaries, if they please, to preach against it; and let them, by any fair means (of which silencing the teachers is not one) oppose the progress of similar doctrines among their own people. if civilization has gained the upper hand over barbarism when barbarism had the world to itself, it is absurd to claim to be afraid that barbarism, after having been fairly put down, might revive and conquer civilization. a civilization that could thus be beaten by its vanquished enemy must already have become so degenerate that neither its appointed priests and teachers nor anybody else is able to stand up for it or anyway will take the trouble to do so. in that case, the sooner such a civilization receives notice to quit, the better! it can only go on from bad to worse until it is destroyed and regenerated (like the western part of the roman empire) by energetic barbarians.

footnote: the case of the bombay parsees is a curious instance in point. when this industrious and enterprising tribe, the descendants of the persian fire-worshippers, flying from their native country before the caliphs, arrived in western india, they were admitted to toleration by the hindoo sovereigns, on condition of not eating beef. when those regions afterwards fell under the dominion of mahomedan conquerors, the parsees obtained from them a continuance of indulgence, on condition of refraining from pork. what was at first obedience to authority became a second nature, and the parsees to this day abstain both from beef and pork. though not required by their religion, the double abstinence has had time to grow into a custom of their tribe; and custom, in the east, is a religion.
the case of the bombay parsis is an interesting example of this. this industrious and enterprising tribe, the descendants of the persian fire-worshippers, fled from their native country to escape the caliphs; when they arrived in western india they were tolerated by the hindu sovereigns on condition that they gave up eating beef. when those regions afterwards fell under the dominion of moslem conquerors, the parsis obtained from them a continuing tolerance on condition that they gave up eating pork. what was at first obedience to authority became a second nature, and the parsis to this day abstain both from beef and pork. though not required by their religion, this double abstinence has had time to grow into a custom of their tribe; and in the east custom is a religion.

chapter v.
chapter 5: applications

the principles asserted in these pages must be more generally admitted as the basis for discussion of details, before a consistent application of them to all the various departments of government and morals can be attempted with any prospect of advantage. the few observations i propose to make on questions of detail, are designed to illustrate the principles, rather than to follow them out to their consequences. i offer, not so much applications, as specimens of application; which may serve to bring into greater clearness the meaning and limits of the two maxims which together form the entire doctrine of this essay, and to assist the judgment in holding the balance between them, in the cases where it appears doubtful which of them is applicable to the case.
one would like the principles asserted in these pages to be applied consistently across all the various branches of government and morals; but there is no chance of doing that fruitfully until the principles have become more generally accepted, so that they can be the basis for a discussion of the relevant details. the few remarks i shall make on questions of detail are meant to illustrate the principles rather than to follow them out to their consequences. what i shall be offering are not so much applications as specimens of application. they may serve to clarify the meaning and the limits of the two maxims that together form the entire doctrine of this work, and to assist the judgment in holding the balance between them in the cases where it appears doubtful which of them is applicable to the case.

the maxims are, first, that the individual is not accountable to society for his actions, in so far as these concern the interests of no person but himself. advice, instruction, persuasion, and avoidance by other people if thought necessary by them for their own good, are the only measures by which society can justifiably express its dislike or disapprobation of his conduct. secondly, that for such actions as are prejudicial to the interests of others, the individual is accountable and may be subjected either to social or to legal punishments, if society is of opinion that the one or the other is requisite for its protection.
the principles in question are these two: (1) the individual is not accountable to society for his actions insofar as these concern the interests of no-one but himself. advice, instruction, persuasion, and avoidance by other people, if they think it necessary for the individual's own good, are the only measures by which society can justifiably express its dislike or disapproval of his conduct. (2) the individual is accountable for such of his actions as are prejudicial to the interests of others, and he may be subjected either to social or to legal punishments if society thinks that one or the other is needed for its protection.

in the first place, it must by no means be supposed, because damage, or probability of damage, to the interests of others, can alone justify the interference of society, that therefore it always does justify such interference. in many cases, an individual, in pursuing a legitimate object, necessarily and therefore legitimately causes pain or loss to others, or intercepts a good which they had a reasonable hope of obtaining. such oppositions of interest between individuals often arise from bad social institutions, but are unavoidable while those institutions last; and some would be unavoidable under any institutions. whoever succeeds in an overcrowded profession, or in a competitive examination; whoever is preferred to another in any contest for an object which both desire, reaps benefit from the loss of others, from their wasted exertion and their disappointment. but it is, by common admission, better for the general interest of mankind, that persons should pursue their objects undeterred by this sort of consequences. in other words, society admits no rights, either legal or moral, in the disappointed competitors, to immunity from this kind of suffering; and feels called on to interfere, only when means of success have been employed which it is contrary to the general interest to permit namely, fraud or treachery, and force.
the first point to be made is this: just because damage (or the probability of damage) to the interests of others is the only thing that can justify the interference of society, it doesn't follow that it always justifies such interference. in many cases an individual in pursuing a legitimate object necessarily (and therefore legitimately) causes pain or loss to others, or gets for himself a good that someone else had had a reasonable hope of obtaining. such oppositions of interest between individuals often arise from bad social institutions, and are unavoidable while those institutions last; others would be unavoidable under any institutions. anyone who succeeds in an overcrowded profession or in a competitive examination more generally, someone who comes ahead of someone else in any contest for something that they both want derives benefit from his competitor's loss, wasted effort, and disappointment. but we all agree that it is better for the general interest of mankind that people should pursue their objectives undeterred by consequences of this sort. in other words, society doesn't grant disappointed competitors any legal or moral right to immunity from this kind of suffering; and feels called on to interfere in competitive situations only when someone has succeeded through means that it is contrary to the general interest to permit namely fraud, treachery, or force.

again, trade is a social act. whoever undertakes to sell any description of goods to the public, does what affects the interest of other persons, and of society in general; and thus his conduct, in principle, comes within the jurisdiction of society: accordingly, it was once held to be the duty of governments, in all cases which were considered of importance, to fix prices, and regulate the processes of manufacture. but it is now recognised, though not till after a long struggle, that both the cheapness and the good quality of commodities are most effectually provided for by leaving the producers and sellers perfectly free, under the sole check of equal freedom to the buyers for supplying themselves elsewhere. this is the so-called doctrine of free trade, which rests on grounds different from, though equally solid with, the principle of individual liberty asserted in this essay. restrictions on trade, or on production for purposes of trade, are indeed restraints; and all restraint, qua restraint, is an evil: but the restraints in question affect only that part of conduct which society is competent to restrain, and are wrong solely because they do not really produce the results which it is desired to produce by them. as the principle of individual liberty is not involved in the doctrine of free trade, so neither is it in most of the questions which arise respecting the limits of that doctrine: as for example, what amount of public control is admissible for the prevention of fraud by adulteration; how far sanitary precautions, or arrangements to protect work-people employed in dangerous occupations, should be enforced on employers. such questions involve considerations of liberty, only in so far as leaving people to themselves is always better, cteris paribus, than controlling them: but that they may be legitimately controlled for these ends, is in principle undeniable. on the other hand, there are questions relating to interference with trade, which are essentially questions of liberty; such as the maine law, already touched upon; the prohibition of the importation of opium into china; the restriction of the sale of poisons; all cases, in short, where the object of the interference is to make it impossible or difficult to obtain a particular commodity. these interferences are objectionable, not as infringements on the liberty of the producer or seller, but on that of the buyer.
free trade again, trade is a social act. someone who undertakes to sell goods of any kind to the public is doing something that affects the interests of other people and of society in general; and so his conduct does in principle come within the jurisdiction of society; which is why it used to be thought the duty of governments, in all cases that were thought important, to fix prices and regulate the processes of manufacture. but it is now recognized, though only after a long struggle, that the best way to get good products at low prices is to leave the producers and sellers perfectly free, as long as the buyers are free to get their supplies from elsewhere. this is the so-called doctrine of free trade. the case for it is different from the case for the principle of individual liberty defended here, but it is just as solid. restrictions on trade, or on production for purposes of trade, are indeed restraints; and restraint as such is always bad; but the restraints on trade that are in question here affect only that part of conduct that society is in principle entitled to restrain, and they are wrong purely because they don't really produce the results they are meant to produce. so the principle of individual liberty is not involved in the doctrine of free trade itself, nor does it come into most of the questions that arise concerning the limits of that doctrine: for example, how much public control is admissible to prevent fraud by adulteration; how far sanitary precautions, or arrangements to protect people working in dangerous occupations, should be enforced on employers. questions like these involve the liberty issue only in a marginal way, through the general thesis that leaving people to themselves is always better, other things being equal, than controlling them. it can't be denied that people may be legitimately controlled for ends such as the ones i have just mentioned. on the other hand, some questions relating to interference with trade are centrally questions of liberty; such as the maine law mentioned above here, the prohibition on importing opium into china, the restriction of the sale of poisons; all cases in short, where the object of the interference is to make it hard or impossible to obtain a particular commodity. these interferences are objectionable as infringements on the liberty not of the producer or seller but of the buyer. selling poisons

one of these examples, that of the sale of poisons, opens a new question; the proper limits of what may be called the functions of police; how far liberty may legitimately be invaded for the prevention of crime, or of accident. it is one of the undisputed functions of government to take precautions against crime before it has been committed, as well as to detect and punish it afterwards. the preventive function of government, however, is far more liable to be abused, to the prejudice of liberty, than the punitory function; for there is hardly any part of the legitimate freedom of action of a human being which would not admit of being represented, and fairly too, as increasing the facilities for some form or other of delinquency. nevertheless, if a public authority, or even a private person, sees any one evidently preparing to commit a crime, they are not bound to look on inactive until the crime is committed, but may interfere to prevent it. if poisons were never bought or used for any purpose except the commission of murder, it would be right to prohibit their manufacture and sale. they may, however, be wanted not only for innocent but for useful purposes, and restrictions cannot be imposed in the one case without operating in the other. again, it is a proper office of public authority to guard against accidents. if either a public officer or any one else saw a person attempting to cross a bridge which had been ascertained to be unsafe, and there were no time to warn him of his danger, they might seize him and turn him back, without any real infringement of his liberty; for liberty consists in doing what one desires, and he does not desire to fall into the river. nevertheless, when there is not a certainty, but only a danger of mischief, no one but the person himself can judge of the sufficiency of the motive which may prompt him to incur the risk: in this case, therefore (unless he is a child, or delirious, or in some state of excitement or absorption incompatible with the full use of the reflecting faculty), he ought, i conceive, to be only warned of the danger; not forcibly prevented from exposing himself to it. similar considerations, applied to such a question as the sale of poisons, may enable us to decide which among the possible modes of regulation are or are not contrary to principle. such a precaution, for example, as that of labelling the drug with some word expressive of its dangerous character, may be enforced without violation of liberty: the buyer cannot wish not to know that the thing he possesses has poisonous qualities. but to require in all cases the certificate of a medical practitioner, would make it sometimes impossible, always expensive, to obtain the article for legitimate uses. the only mode apparent to me, in which difficulties may be thrown in the way of crime committed through this means, without any infringement, worth taking into account, upon the liberty of those who desire the poisonous substance for other purposes, consists in providing what, in the apt language of bentham, is called preappointed evidence. this provision is familiar to every one in the case of contracts. it is usual and right that the law, when a contract is entered into, should require as the condition of its enforcing performance, that certain formalities should be observed, such as signatures, attestation of witnesses, and the like, in order that in case of subsequent dispute, there may be evidence to prove that the contract was really entered into, and that there was nothing in the circumstances to render it legally invalid: the effect being, to throw great obstacles in the way of fictitious contracts, or contracts made in circumstances which, if known, would destroy their validity. precautions of a similar nature might be enforced in the sale of articles adapted to be instruments of crime. the seller, for example, might be required to enter into a register the exact time of the transaction, the name and address of the buyer, the precise quality and quantity sold; to ask the purpose for which it was wanted, and record the answer he received. when there was no medical prescription, the presence of some third person might be required, to bring home the fact to the purchaser, in case there should afterwards be reason to believe that the article had been applied to criminal purposes. such regulations would in general be no material impediment to obtaining the article, but a very considerable one to making an improper use of it without detection.
one of these examples, that of the sale of poisons, raises a new question the question of what the proper limits are of what may be called the functions of police. how far can liberty legitimately be invaded for the prevention of crime or of accidents? it is one of the undisputed functions of government to take precautions against crime before it has been committed, as well as to detect and punish it afterwards. the preventive function of government, however, is far more liable to be abused at the expense of liberty than is its punitive function; for almost every part of the legitimate freedom of action of a human being could be represented, and fairly too, as increasing the facilities for some kind of misconduct. (someone earns his living making hammers; now think about the crimes that can be committed using a hammer!) still, if a public authority or even a private person sees someone evidently preparing to commit a crime, they aren't bound to stay out of it until the crime is committed, but may interfere to prevent it. if poisons were never bought or used for any purpose except to commit murder, it would be right to prohibit their manufacture and sale. in fact, however, they may be wanted for purposes that are not only innocent but useful, and restrictions can't be imposed in one case without operating also in the other. again, it is a proper part of the duty of public authority to guard against accidents. if either a public officer or anyone else saw a person starting to cross a bridge that was known to be unsafe, and there was no time to warn him of his danger, they might seize him and pull him back without any real infringement of his liberty; for liberty consists in doing what one desires, and he doesn't desire to fall into the river. nevertheless, when there is not a certainty of trouble but only a risk of it, no-one but the person himself can judge whether in this case he has a strong enough motive to make it worthwhile to run the risk; and so i think he ought only to be warned of the danger, not forcibly prevented from exposing himself to it. (this doesn't apply if he is a child, or delirious, or in some state of excitement or pre-occupation that won't let him think carefully.) similar considerations, applied to such a question as the sale of poisons, may enable us to decide which possible kinds of regulation are contrary to principle and which are not. for example, a precaution such as labelling the drug with some word warning of its dangerous character can be enforced without violation of liberty: the buyer can't want not to know that the stuff he has bought has poisonous qualities. but to require that in all such cases a doctor's prescription be produced would make it sometimes impossible, and always expensive, to obtain the article for legitimate uses. the only way that i can see of putting difficulties in the way of crime committed through poison, without significantly infringing on the liberty of those who want the poisonous substance for other purposes, is to provide what bentham has aptly called preappointed evidence. this is familiar to everyone in the case of contracts. when a contract is entered into, it is usual and right that the law should require, as a condition of its being enforceable, that certain formalities should be observed signatures, attestation of witnesses, and so on so that if any dispute should later arise there will be evidence to show that the contract was really entered into, and that there was nothing in the circumstances to make it legally invalid: the effect being to throw great obstacles in the way of fictitious contracts, or contracts that wouldn't be valid if the circumstances in which they were made became known. precautions of a similar nature might be enforced in the sale of articles that could be used as instruments of crime. the seller, for example, might be required to enter in a register the exact time of the sale, the name and address of the buyer, and the precise quality and quantity sold; to ask what it was wanted for, and to record the answer he received. and when there was no medical prescription, the presence of some third person might be required, to bring home to the purchaser the fact of what he was buying, in case there should afterwards be reason to think it had been used for criminal purposes. such regulations wouldn't make it much harder to obtain the poison, but would make it much harder to use it improperly without detection.

the right inherent in society, to ward off crimes against itself by antecedent precautions, suggests the obvious limitations to the maxim, that purely self-regarding misconduct cannot properly be meddled with in the way of prevention or punishment. drunkenness, for example, in ordinary cases, is not a fit subject for legislative interference; but i should deem it perfectly legitimate that a person, who had once been convicted of any act of violence to others under the influence of drink, should be placed under a special legal restriction, personal to himself; that if he were afterwards found drunk, he should be liable to a penalty, and that if when in that state he committed another offence, the punishment to which he would be liable for that other offence should be increased in severity. the making himself drunk, in a person whom drunkenness excites to do harm to others, is a crime against others. so, again, idleness, except in a person receiving support from the public, or except when it constitutes a breach of contract, cannot without tyranny be made a subject of legal punishment; but if either from idleness or from any other avoidable cause, a man fails to perform his legal duties to others, as for instance to support his children, it is no tyranny to force him to fulfil that obligation, by compulsory labour, if no other means are available.
selling alcohol society's inherent right to ward off crimes against itself by antecedent precautions suggests the obvious limitations to the maxim that purely self-regarding misconduct cannot properly be meddled with in the way of prevention or punishment. for example, drunkenness isn't a fit subject for legislative interference; but if someone had once been convicted of an act of violence to others under the influence of drink, i think it legitimate that he should be placed under a special legal restriction, personal to himself; that if he were ever again found drunk he would be liable to a penalty, and that if when in that state he committed another offence, the punishment he would be liable to for that other offence should be increased in severity. in a person whom drunkenness excites to do harm to others, making himself drunk is a crime against others. another example: if an idle person isn't receiving support from the public or breaking a contract, it would be tyranny for him to be legally punished for his idleness; but if he is failing to perform his legal duties to others, as for instance to support his children, it is not tyrannical to force him to fulfil that obligation by forced labour if no other means are available. this applies whether the source of the trouble is his idleness or some other avoidable cause.

again, there are many acts which, being directly injurious only to the agents themselves, ought not to be legally interdicted, but which, if done publicly, are a violation of good manners and coming thus within the category of offences against others may rightfully be prohibited. of this kind are offences against decency; on which it is unnecessary to dwell, the rather as they are only connected indirectly with our subject, the objection to publicity being equally strong in the case of many actions not in themselves condemnable, nor supposed to be so.
again, there are many acts which, being directly harmful only to the agents themselves, ought not to be legally prohibited, but which when done publicly are a violation of good manners. that brings them within the category of offences against others, and so they may rightfully be prohibited. offences against decency come into this category, but i shan't spend time on them, especially since they are connected only indirectly with our subject. indecent actions are thought of as wrong in themselves, whether or not done publicly; but the objection to publicness which is our subject is equally strong in the case of many actions that aren't in themselves condemnable and aren't thought to be so by anyone.

a further question is, whether the state, while it permits, should nevertheless indirectly discourage conduct which it deems contrary to the best interests of the agent; whether, for example, it should take measures to render the means of drunkenness more costly, or add to the difficulty of procuring them, by limiting the number of the places of sale. on this as on most other practical questions, many distinctions require to be made. to tax stimulants for the sole purpose of making them more difficult to be obtained, is a measure differing only in degree from their entire prohibition; and would be justifiable only if that were justifiable. every increase of cost is a prohibition, to those whose means do not come up to the augmented price; and to those who do, it is a penalty laid on them for gratifying a particular taste. their choice of pleasures, and their mode of expending their income, after satisfying their legal and moral obligations to the state and to individuals, are their own concern, and must rest with their own judgment. these considerations may seem at first sight to condemn the selection of stimulants as special subjects of taxation for purposes of revenue. but it must be remembered that taxation for fiscal purposes is absolutely inevitable; that in most countries it is necessary that a considerable part of that taxation should be indirect; that the state, therefore, cannot help imposing penalties, which to some persons may be prohibitory, on the use of some articles of consumption. it is hence the duty of the state to consider, in the imposition of taxes, what commodities the consumers can best spare; and a fortiori, to select in preference those of which it deems the use, beyond a very moderate quantity, to be positively injurious. taxation, therefore, of stimulants, up to the point which produces the largest amount of revenue (supposing that the state needs all the revenue which it yields) is not only admissible, but to be approved of.
a further question: when the state regards certain conduct as contrary to the best interests of the agent, should it without forbidding that conduct nevertheless discourage it? for example, should the state take measures to make the means of drunkenness more costly, or make them harder to get by limiting the number of the places where they are sold? on this as on most other practical questions, many distinctions need to be made. to tax stimulants solely so as to make them more difficult to obtain is a measure differing only in degree from prohibiting them entirely; and it would be justifiable only if prohibition were justifiable. every increase of cost is a prohibition to those who can't afford the newly raised price; and to those who can afford it, the increase is a penalty inflicted on them for gratifying a particular taste. their choice of pleasures, and their way of spending their income (after satisfying their legal and moral obligations to the state and to individuals), are their own concern and must be left to their own judgment. these considerations may seem at first sight to condemn the selection of alcohol as a special subject of taxation for purposes of revenue. but it must be remembered that taxation for fiscal purposes is absolutely inevitable; that in most countries a considerable part of that taxation has to be indirect; and therefore that the state can't help imposing penalties on the use of some articles of consumption penalties that may prevent some people from buying such articles. so the state has a duty to consider, in the imposition of taxes, what commodities the consumers can best spare; and that points very clearly to commodities that it thinks are positively harmful when used in more than very moderate quantities. (something that will harm people is certainly something they can spare!) so taxation of stimulants up to the point that produces the largest amount of revenue (supposing that the state needs so much) is not only admissible but to be approved of.

the question of making the sale of these commodities a more or less exclusive privilege, must be answered differently, according to the purposes to which the restriction is intended to be subservient. all places of public resort require the restraint of a police, and places of this kind peculiarly, because offences against society are especially apt to originate there. it is, therefore, fit to confine the power of selling these commodities (at least for consumption on the spot) to persons of known or vouched-for respectability of conduct; to make such regulations respecting hours of opening and closing as may be requisite for public surveillance, and to withdraw the licence if breaches of the peace repeatedly take place through the connivance or incapacity of the keeper of the house, or if it becomes a rendezvous for concocting and preparing offences against the law. any further restriction i do not conceive to be, in principle, justifiable. the limitation in number, for instance, of beer and spirit-houses, for the express purpose of rendering them more difficult of access, and diminishing the occasions of temptation, not only exposes all to an inconvenience because there are some by whom the facility would be abused, but is suited only to a state of society in which the labouring classes are avowedly treated as children or savages, and placed under an education of restraint, to fit them for future admission to the privileges of freedom. this is not the principle on which the labouring classes are professedly governed in any free country; and no person who sets due value on freedom will give his adhesion to their being so governed, unless after all efforts have been exhausted to educate them for freedom and govern them as freemen, and it has been definitively proved that they can only be governed as children. the bare statement of the alternative shows the absurdity of supposing that such efforts have been made in any case which needs be considered here. it is only because the institutions of this country are a mass of inconsistencies, that things find admittance into our practice which belong to the system of despotic, or what is called paternal, government, while the general freedom of our institutions precludes the exercise of the amount of control necessary to render the restraint of any real efficacy as a moral education.
how exclusive a privilege should the sale of these commodities be? the answer depends on what purposes the restriction is intended to serve. all places where the public gather require the restraint of a police i can't think of any further restriction that would be in principle justifiable. what about limiting the number of beer and spirit-houses so as to make them harder to get to, thus reducing the occasions of temptation? no. not only does that expose all to an inconvenience because there are some who would make bad use of easily found drinking-houses, but also it is suited only to a state of society in which the labouring classes are openly treated as children or savages, and placed under a discipline of restraint like that of a child to fit them for future admission to the privileges of freedom. this is not the principle on which the labouring classes are said to be governed in any free country; and no-one who properly values freedom will assent to their being so governed unless this is the case: all efforts have been exhausted to train them for freedom and govern them as freemen, and it has been definitively proved that they can only be governed as children. the bare statement of this condition shows the absurdity of supposing that such efforts have been made in any case that needs be considered here. the institutions of this country are a mass of inconsistencies, with the result that we admit into our practice restraints that belong to the system of despotic government (also called paternal government), while the general freedom of our institutions prevents the exercise of the amount of control that would be needed to make the restraints really effective as moral education.

it was pointed out in an early part of this essay, that the liberty of the individual, in things wherein the individual is alone concerned, implies a corresponding liberty in any number of individuals to regulate by mutual agreement such things as regard them jointly, and regard no persons but themselves. this question presents no difficulty, so long as the will of all the persons implicated remains unaltered; but since that will may change, it is often necessary, even in things in which they alone are concerned, that they should enter into engagements with one another; and when they do, it is fit, as a general rule, that those engagements should be kept. yet in the laws, probably, of every country, this general rule has some exceptions. not only persons are not held to engagements which violate the rights of third parties, but it is sometimes considered a sufficient reason for releasing them from an engagement, that it is injurious to themselves. in this and most other civilised countries, for example, an engagement by which a person should sell himself, or allow himself to be sold, as a slave, would be null and void; neither enforced by law nor by opinion. the ground for thus limiting his power of voluntarily disposing of his own lot in life, is apparent, and is very clearly seen in this extreme case. the reason for not interfering, unless for the sake of others, with a person's voluntary acts, is consideration for his liberty. his voluntary choice is evidence that what he so chooses is desirable, or at the least endurable, to him, and his good is on the whole best provided for by allowing him to take his own means of pursuing it. but by selling himself for a slave, he abdicates his liberty; he foregoes any future use of it, beyond that single act. he therefore defeats, in his own case, the very purpose which is the justification of allowing him to dispose of himself. he is no longer free; but is thenceforth in a position which has no longer the presumption in its favour, that would be afforded by his voluntarily remaining in it. the principle of freedom cannot require that he should be free not to be free. it is not freedom, to be allowed to alienate his freedom. these reasons, the force of which is so conspicuous in this peculiar case, are evidently of far wider application; yet a limit is everywhere set to them by the necessities of life, which continually require, not indeed that we should resign our freedom, but that we should consent to this and the other limitation of it. the principle, however, which demands uncontrolled freedom of action in all that concerns only the agents themselves, requires that those who have become bound to one another, in things which concern no third party, should be able to release one another from the engagement: and even without such voluntary release, there are perhaps no contracts or engagements, except those that relate to money or money's worth, of which one can venture to say that there ought to be no liberty whatever of retractation. baron wilhelm von humboldt, in the excellent essay from which i have already quoted, states it as his conviction, that engagements which involve personal relations or services, should never be legally binding beyond a limited duration of time; and that the most important of these engagements, marriage, having the peculiarity that its objects are frustrated unless the feelings of both the parties are in harmony with it, should require nothing more than the declared will of either party to dissolve it. this subject is too important, and too complicated, to be discussed in a parenthesis, and i touch on it only so far as is necessary for purposes of illustration. if the conciseness and generality of baron humboldt's dissertation had not obliged him in this instance to content himself with enunciating his conclusion without discussing the premises, he would doubtless have recognised that the question cannot be decided on grounds so simple as those to which he confines himself. when a person, either by express promise or by conduct, has encouraged another to rely upon his continuing to act in a certain way to build expectations and calculations, and stake any part of his plan of life upon that supposition, a new series of moral obligations arises on his part towards that person, which may possibly be overruled, but cannot be ignored. and again, if the relation between two contracting parties has been followed by consequences to others; if it has placed third parties in any peculiar position, or, as in the case of marriage, has even called third parties into existence, obligations arise on the part of both the contracting parties towards those third persons, the fulfilment of which, or at all events the mode of fulfilment, must be greatly affected by the continuance or disruption of the relation between the original parties to the contract. it does not follow, nor can i admit, that these obligations extend to requiring the fulfilment of the contract at all costs to the happiness of the reluctant party; but they are a necessary element in the question; and even if, as von humboldt maintains, they ought to make no difference in the legal freedom of the parties to release themselves from the engagement (and i also hold that they ought not to make much difference), they necessarily make a great difference in the moral
i pointed out in an early part of this work that the liberty of the individual, in matters that concern him alone, implies a corresponding liberty in any number of individuals to regulate by mutual agreement such matters as involve them jointly and don't involve anyone else. there is no problem about this so long as the will of all the people in question remains unaltered; but since that will may change, it is often necessary (even when no-one else is affected) that they should enter into engagements with one another; and when they do, it is generally good that those engagements should be kept. yet probably every country has laws creating some exceptions to this general rule. people are not held to engagements that violate the rights of third parties; but also it is sometimes considered a sufficient reason for releasing them from an engagement that it is harmful to themselves. in this and most other civilized countries, for example, an engagement by which a person sells himself (or allows himself to be sold) as a slave would be null and void not enforced by law or by public opinion. the ground for thus limiting his power of voluntarily disposing of his own course of life is obvious, and is very clearly seen in this extreme case. here it is. the reason for not interfering with a person's voluntary acts except for the sake of others is consideration for his liberty. his voluntary choice is evidence that what he so chooses is desirable to him, or at least endurable by him, and his good is on the whole best provided for by allowing him to pursue it in his own way. but by selling himself as a slave he abdicates his liberty; he forgoes any future use of it after that single act. he therefore defeats the very purpose that is the justification for allowing him to dispose of himself. from now on he won't be free. the principle of freedom can't require that he should be free not to be free! being allowed to give up his freedom is not freedom. these reasons, the force of which is so conspicuous in this special case, are evidently of far wider application; yet a limit is everywhere set to them by the necessities of life, which continually require not that we should give up our freedom but that we should consent to this or that limitation of it. but the principle that demands uncontrolled freedom of action in all that concerns only the agents themselves requires that those who have become obliged to one another in things that don't concern any third party should be able to release one another from their engagement.

i have already observed that, owing to the absence of any recognised general principles, liberty is often granted where it should be withheld, as well as withheld where it should be granted; and one of the cases in which, in the modern european world, the sentiment of liberty is the strongest, is a case where, in my view, it is altogether misplaced. a person should be free to do as he likes in his own concerns; but he ought not to be free to do as he likes in acting for another, under the pretext that the affairs of another are his own affairs. the state, while it respects the liberty of each in what specially regards himself, is bound to maintain a vigilant control over his exercise of any power which it allows him to possess over others. this obligation is almost entirely disregarded in the case of the family relations, a case, in its direct influence on human happiness, more important than all others taken together. the almost despotic power of husbands over wives need not be enlarged upon here because nothing more is needed for the complete removal of the evil, than that wives should have the same rights, and should receive the protection of law in the same manner, as all other persons; and because, on this subject, the defenders of established injustice do not avail themselves of the plea of liberty, but stand forth openly as the champions of power. it is in the case of children, that misapplied notions of liberty are a real obstacle to the fulfilment by the state of its duties. one would almost think that a man's children were supposed to be literally, and not metaphorically, a part of himself, so jealous is opinion of the smallest interference of law with his absolute and exclusive control over them; more jealous than of almost any interference with his own freedom of action: so much less do the generality of mankind value liberty than power. consider, for example, the case of education. is it not almost a self-evident axiom, that the state should require and compel the education, up to a certain standard, of every human being who is born its citizen? yet who is there that is not afraid to recognise and assert this truth? hardly any one indeed will deny that it is one of the most sacred duties of the parents (or, as law and usage now stand, the father), after summoning a human being into the world, to give to that being an education fitting him to perform his part well in life towards others and towards himself. but while this is unanimously declared to be the father's duty, scarcely anybody, in this country, will bear to hear of obliging him to perform it. instead of his being required to make any exertion or sacrifice for securing education to the child, it is left to his choice to accept it or not when it is provided gratis! it still remains unrecognised, that to bring a child into existence without a fair prospect of being able, not only to provide food for its body, but instruction and training for its mind, is a moral crime, both against the unfortunate offspring and against society; and that if the parent does not fulfil this obligation, the state ought to see it fulfilled, at the charge, as far as possible, of the parent.
power of husbands over wives i have already remarked that because there are no recognized general principles governing it, liberty is often granted where it should be withheld, as well as withheld where it should be granted. one of the cases in which the sentiment of liberty is the strongest in modern europe is a case where i think it is altogether misplaced. a person should be free to do as he likes in his own concerns, but he ought not to be free to do as he likes in acting for someone else under the pretext that the other person's affairs are his affairs. the state, while it respects the liberty of each in what specially concerns himself, is bound to maintain a vigilant control over his exercise of any power over others that it lets him have. this obligation is almost entirely disregarded in the case of family relations, a case whose direct influence on human happiness makes it more important than all the others taken together. the almost despotic power of husbands over wives isn't something i need to go into here, because it doesn't provide an illuminating work-out for the principle of liberty. there are two reasons for this. one is that cure for this despotism is perfectly simple: all that is needed for the complete removal of the evil is for wives to have the same rights, and to be protected by the law in the same manner, as everyone else. the other is that nobody defends the power of husbands over wives by mis-applying the notion of the husbands liberty: on this subject, the defenders of established injustice don't avail themselves of the plea of liberty, but come out openly as the champions of power. it is in the case of children that misapplied notions of liberty are a real obstacle to the state's fulfilling its duties. one would almost think that a man's children were supposed to be literally (and not metaphorically) a part of himself, given how public opinion watches for and objects to the smallest interference of law with his absolute and exclusive control over them. it watches over this more than over almost any interference with the father's own freedom of action so much less do people value liberty than they value power.

were the duty of enforcing universal education once admitted, there would be an end to the difficulties about what the state should teach, and how it should teach, which now convert the subject into a mere battle-field for sects and parties, causing the time and labour which should have been spent in educating, to be wasted in quarrelling about education. if the government would make up its mind to require for every child a good education, it might save itself the trouble of providing one. it might leave to parents to obtain the education where and how they pleased, and content itself with helping to pay the school fees of the poorer class of children, and defraying the entire school expenses of those who have no one else to pay for them. the objections which are urged with reason against state education, do not apply to the enforcement of education by the state, but to the state's taking upon itself to direct that education; which is a totally different thing. that the whole or any large part of the education of the people should be in state hands, i go as far as any one in deprecating. all that has been said of the importance of individuality of character, and diversity in opinions and modes of conduct, involves, as of the same unspeakable importance, diversity of education. a general state education is a mere contrivance for moulding people to be exactly like one another; and as the mould in which it casts them is that which pleases the predominant power in the government, whether this be a monarch, a priesthood, an aristocracy, or the majority of the existing generation, in proportion as it is efficient and successful, it establishes a despotism over the mind, leading by natural tendency to one over the body. an education established and controlled by the state, should only exist, if it exist at all, as one among many competing experiments, carried on for the purpose of example and stimulus, to keep the others up to a certain standard of excellence. unless, indeed, when society in general is in so backward a state that it could not or would not provide for itself any proper institutions of education, unless the government undertook the task; then, indeed, the government may, as the less of two great evils, take upon itself the business of schools and universities, as it may that of joint stock companies, when private enterprise, in a shape fitted for undertaking great works of industry, does not exist in the country. but in general, if the country contains a sufficient number of persons qualified to provide education under government auspices, the same persons would be able and willing to give an equally good education on the voluntary principle, under the assurance of remuneration afforded by a law rendering education compulsory, combined with state aid to those unable to defray the expense.
consider, for example, the case of education. isn't it almost a self-evident axiom that the state should require and compel the education, up to a certain standard, of every human being who is born its citizen? yet who is there that isn't afraid to recognize and assert this truth? hardly anyone indeed will deny that it is one of the most sacred duties of the parents (or, as law and usage now stand, the father!) after calling a human being into the world to give to that being an education fitting him to perform his part well in life towards others and towards himself. but while this is unanimously declared to be the father's duty, hardly anyone in this country will listen to the suggestion that he should be obliged to perform it. instead of his being required to make any exertion or sacrifice for securing education to the child, it is left to his choice to accept it or not, even when it is provided at no cost to himself! it still isn't generally recognized that to bring a child into existence without a fair prospect of being able to provide food for its body and also instruction and training for its mind is a moral crime, both against the unfortunate offspring and against society; and that if the parent doesn't fulfil this obligation the state ought to ensure that it is fulfilled with the costs falling on the parent as far as possible. if the government's duty to enforce universal education were once admitted, that would put an end to the difficulties about what the state should teach, and how it should teach. these difficulties now convert the subject into a mere battle-field for sects and parties, causing the time and labour that should have been spent on educating to be wasted in quarrelling about education. if the government made up its mind to require a good education for every child, it could save itself the trouble of providing one. it could leave it up to parents to obtain the education where and how they pleased, and restrict its own involvement to helping to pay the school fees of the poorer classes of children, and paying the entire school expenses of those who have no-one else to pay for them. the reasonable objections that are brought against state education don't apply to the enforcement of education by the state; their target is the state's taking on itself the task of directing that education, which is a totally different thing. no-one objects more strongly than i do to the state's being in charge of the whole or any large part of the education of the people. everything i have said about the importance of individuality of character, and variety in opinions and ways of life, applies also to variety in education, which is of the same enormous importance as those three. a general state education is a mere contrivance for moulding people to be exactly like one another; and as the mould in which it casts them is the one that pleases the predominant power in the government, insofar as it is efficient and successful to that extent it establishes a despotism over the mind, which naturally leads to despotism over the body. and this is true whatever the predominant power may be whether a monarch, a priesthood, an aristocracy, or the majority of the people at that time. if there is to be any education established and controlled by the state, it should be merely one among many competing experiments, carried on for the purpose of example and stimulus, to keep the others up to a certain standard of excellence. an exception to this generalization is created when a society in general is in such a backward condition that it can't or won't provide for itself any proper institutions of education unless the government takes on the task. in that case, indeed, the government may accept for itself, as the lesser of two great evils, the business of schools and universities; just as it may take on the running of joint-stock companies in a country that has no system of private enterprise adequate for undertaking great works of industry. but in general, if a country contains enough people qualified to provide education under government auspices, those same people would be able and willing to give an equally good education at private schools, given the assurance of payment that would be provided by a law making education compulsory, together with state aid to those unable to pay for themselves.

the instrument for enforcing the law could be no other than public examinations, extending to all children, and beginning at an early age. an age might be fixed at which every child must be examined, to ascertain if he (or she) is able to read. if a child proves unable, the father, unless he has some sufficient ground of excuse, might be subjected to a moderate fine, to be worked out, if necessary, by his labour, and the child might be put to school at his expense. once in every year the examination should be renewed, with a gradually extending range of subjects, so as to make the universal acquisition, and what is more, retention, of a certain minimum of general knowledge, virtually compulsory. beyond that minimum, there should be voluntary examinations on all subjects, at which all who come up to a certain standard of proficiency might claim a certificate. to prevent the state from exercising, through these arrangements, an improper influence over opinion, the knowledge required for passing an examination (beyond the merely instrumental parts of knowledge, such as languages and their use) should, even in the higher class of examinations, be confined to facts and positive science exclusively. the examinations on religion, politics, or other disputed topics, should not turn on the truth or falsehood of opinions, but on the matter of fact that such and such an opinion is held, on such grounds, by such authors, or schools, or churches. under this system, the rising generation would be no worse off in regard to all disputed truths, than they are at present; they would be brought up either churchmen or dissenters as they now are, the state merely taking care that they should be instructed churchmen, or instructed dissenters. there would be nothing to hinder them from being taught religion, if their parents chose, at the same schools where they were taught other things. all attempts by the state to bias the conclusions of its citizens on disputed subjects, are evil; but it may very properly offer to ascertain and certify that a person possesses the knowledge, requisite to make his conclusions, on any given subject, worth attending to. a student of philosophy would be the better for being able to stand an examination both in locke and in kant, whichever of the two he takes up with, or even if with neither: and there is no reasonable objection to examining an atheist in the evidences of christianity, provided he is not required to profess a belief in them. the examinations, however, in the higher branches of knowledge should, i conceive, be entirely voluntary. it would be giving too dangerous a power to governments, were they allowed to exclude any one from professions, even from the profession of teacher, for alleged deficiency of qualifications: and i think, with wilhelm von humboldt, that degrees, or other public certificates of scientific or professional acquirements, should be given to all who present themselves for examination, and stand the test; but that such certificates should confer no advantage over competitors, other than the weight which may be attached to their testimony by public opinion.
how could such a law be enforced? it would have to be through public examinations, extending to all children and beginning at an early age. an age might be fixed at which every child must be examined, to discover whether he or she could read. a child who turns out to be unable to read might be sent to school at the father's expense, unless the father had some sufficient ground of excuse; and he might also be subjected to a moderate fine which he could if necessary pay by working it off. once in each year the examination should be renewed, with a gradually extending range of subjects, so as to make it virtually compulsory for everyone to have and retain a certain minimum of general knowledge. beyond that minimum, there should be voluntary examinations on all subjects, at which all who reach a certain standard of proficiency might claim a certificate. to prevent the state from exercising through these arrangements an improper influence over opinion, the knowledge required for passing an examination should, even in the higher class of examinations, be strictly confined to facts and positive science and of course the merely instrumental parts of knowledge, such as languages and their use. the examinations on religion, politics, or other controversial topics should depend not on the truth or falsehood of opinions about those topics, but on matters of fact that such and such an opinion is held, on such and such grounds, by such and such authors, or schools, or churches. under this system, the coming generation would be no worse off in regard to all controversial truths than they are at present; they would be brought up as churchmen or dissenters as they now are, the state merely taking care that they should be informed churchmen or informed dissenters. there would be nothing to hinder them from being taught religion, if their parents so chose, at the same schools where they were taught other things. all attempts by the state to bias the conclusions of its citizens on controversial subjects are evil; but the state may very properly offer to discover and certify that a person possesses the knowledge needed to make his conclusions, on any given subject, worth attending to. a student of philosophy would be the better for being able to pass an examination on both locke and kant, whichever of the two he takes up with, and even if he doesn't take up with either; and there is no reasonable objection to examining an atheist on the case for christianity, provided he isn't required to proclaim that he accepts it. but i think that the examinations in the higher branches of knowledge should be entirely voluntary. it would give too dangerous a power to governments if they were allowed to exclude anyone from professions, even from the profession of teacher, for allegedly not being qualified. i agree with wilhelm von humboldt that university degrees or other public certificates of scientific or professional acquirements should be given to all who present themselves for examination and pass the test; but that such certificates should give them no advantage over competitors other than the weight that public opinion may give to them as evidence that the person is qualified.

it is not in the matter of education only, that misplaced notions of liberty prevent moral obligations on the part of parents from being recognised, and legal obligations from being imposed, where there are the strongest grounds for the former always, and in many cases for the latter also. the fact itself, of causing the existence of a human being, is one of the most responsible actions in the range of human life. to undertake this responsibility to bestow a life which may be either a curse or a blessing unless the being on whom it is to be bestowed will have at least the ordinary chances of a desirable existence, is a crime against that being. and in a country either over-peopled, or threatened with being so, to produce children, beyond a very small number, with the effect of reducing the reward of labour by their competition, is a serious offence against all who live by the remuneration of their labour. the laws which, in many countries on the continent, forbid marriage unless the parties can show that they have the means of supporting a family, do not exceed the legitimate powers of the state: and whether such laws be expedient or not (a question mainly dependent on local circumstances and feelings), they are not objectionable as violations of liberty. such laws are interferences of the state to prohibit a mischievous act an act injurious to others, which ought to be a subject of reprobation, and social stigma, even when it is not deemed expedient to superadd legal punishment. yet the current ideas of liberty, which bend so easily to real infringements of the freedom of the individual, in things which concern only himself, would repel the attempt to put any restraint upon his inclinations when the consequence of their indulgence is a life, or lives, of wretchedness and depravity to the offspring, with manifold evils to those sufficiently within reach to be in any way affected by their actions. when we compare the strange respect of mankind for liberty, with their strange want of respect for it, we might imagine that a man had an indispensable right to do harm to others, and no right at all to please himself without giving pain to any one.
having children it is not only in the matter of education that misplaced notions of liberty prevent the moral obligations of parents from being recognized and legal obligations on them from being imposed, in matters where there are always the strongest grounds for the former and in many cases for the latter also. the very act of causing the existence of a human being is one of the most responsible actions in the range of human life. to undertake this responsibility giving a life that may be either a curse or a blessing is a crime against the offspring unless he or she will have at least the ordinary chances of a desirable existence. and in a country that is over-populated or threatened with being so, to produce more than a very small number of children is a serious offence against all who live by the pay they get for their work, because every new child threatens wage-levels by adding to the competition for work. the laws which in many countries on the european continent forbid marriage unless the parties can show that they have the means of supporting a family don't exceed the legitimate powers of the state: and whether such laws really are advisable (which mainly depends on local circumstances and feelings), they are not objectionable as violations of liberty. such laws are interferences by the state to prohibit a bad act an act injurious to others, which ought to bring criticism and social stigma even when it isn't thought advisable to add legal punishment. yet the current ideas of liberty, which bend so easily to real infringements of the freedom of the individual in matters that concern only himself, would repel any attempt to restrain his inclinations when they will otherwise lead to lives of wretchedness and depravity for his offspring, with many evils to other people who are close enough to feel the effects of how the offspring act. when we compare the strange respect of mankind for liberty, with their strange lack of respect for it, we might imagine that a man had an indispensable right to do harm to others and no right at all to please himself without doing harm to anyone.

i have reserved for the last place a large class of questions respecting the limits of government interference, which, though closely connected with the subject of this essay, do not, in strictness, belong to it. these are cases in which the reasons against interference do not turn upon the principle of liberty: the question is not about restraining the actions of individuals, but about helping them: it is asked whether the government should do, or cause to be done, something for their benefit, instead of leaving it to be done by themselves, individually, or in voluntary combination.
size of government i have saved up till the last a large class of questions about the limits of government interference that don't strictly belong to the subject of this essay but are closely connected with it. these questions arise when the reasons against interference don't turn on the principle of liberty. the question is not about restraining the actions of individuals but about helping them: it is asked whether the government should do or cause to be done something for their benefit, instead of leaving it to be done by themselves individually or in voluntary groups.

the first is, when the thing to be done is likely to be better done by individuals than by the government. speaking generally, there is no one so fit to conduct any business, or to determine how or by whom it shall be conducted, as those who are personally interested in it. this principle condemns the interferences, once so common, of the legislature, or the officers of government, with the ordinary processes of industry. but this part of the subject has been sufficiently enlarged upon by political economists, and is not particularly related to the principles of this essay. the second objection is more nearly allied to our subject. in many cases, though individuals may not do the particular thing so well, on the average, as the officers of government, it is nevertheless desirable that it should be done by them, rather than by the government, as a means to their own mental education a mode of strengthening their active faculties, exercising their judgment, and giving them a familiar knowledge of the subjects with which they are thus left to deal. this is a principal, though not the sole, recommendation of jury trial (in cases not political); of free and popular local and municipal institutions; of the conduct of industrial and philanthropic enterprises by voluntary associations. these are not questions of liberty, and are connected with that subject only by remote tendencies; but they are questions of development. it belongs to a different occasion from the present to dwell on these things as parts of national education; as being, in truth, the peculiar training of a citizen, the practical part of the political education of a free people, taking them out of the narrow circle of personal and family selfishness, and accustoming them to the comprehension of joint interests, the management of joint concerns habituating them to act from public or semi-public motives, and guide their conduct by aims which unite instead of isolating them from one another. without these habits and powers, a free constitution can neither be worked nor preserved, as is exemplified by the too-often transitory nature of political freedom in countries where it does not rest upon a sufficient basis of local liberties. the management of purely local business by the localities, and of the great enterprises of industry by the union of those who voluntarily supply the pecuniary means, is further recommended by all the advantages which have been set forth in this essay as belonging to individuality of development, and diversity of modes of action. government operations tend to be everywhere alike. with individuals and voluntary associations, on the contrary, there are varied experiments, and endless diversity of experience. what the state can usefully do, is to make itself a central depository, and active circulator and diffuser, of the experience resulting from many trials. its business is to enable each experimentalist to benefit by the experiments of others, instead of tolerating no experiments but its own. the third, and most cogent reason for restricting the interference of government, is the great evil of adding unnecessarily to its power. every function superadded to those already exercised by the government, causes its influence over hopes and fears to be more widely diffused, and converts, more and more, the active and ambitious part of the public into hangers-on of the government, or of some party which aims at becoming the government. if the roads, the railways, the banks, the insurance offices, the great joint-stock companies, the universities, and the public charities, were all of them branches of the government; if, in addition, the municipal corporations and local boards, with all that now devolves on them, became departments of the central administration; if the employes of all these different enterprises were appointed and paid by the government, and looked to the government for every rise in life; not all the freedom of the press and popular constitution of the legislature would make this or any other country free otherwise than in name. and the evil would be greater, the more efficiently and scientifically the administrative machinery was constructed the more skilful the arrangements for obtaining the best qualified hands and heads with which to work it. in england it has of late been proposed that all the members of the civil service of government should be selected by competitive examination, to obtain for those employments the most intelligent and instructed persons procurable; and much has been said and written for and against this proposal. one of the arguments most insisted on by its opponents, is that the occupation of a permanent official servant of the state does not hold out sufficient prospects of emolument and importance to attract the highest talents, which will always be able to find a more inviting career in the professions, or in the service of companies and other public bodies. one would not have been surprised if this argument had been used by the friends of the proposition, as an answer to its principal difficulty. coming from the opponents it is strange enough. what is urged as an objection is the safety-valve of the proposed system. if indeed all the high talent of the country could be drawn into the service of the government, a proposal tending to bring about that result might well inspire uneasiness. if every part of the business of society which required organised concert, or large and comprehensive views, were in the hands of the government, and if government offices were universally filled by the ablest men, all the enlarged culture and practised intelligence in the country, except the purely speculative, would be concentrated in a numerous bureaucracy, to whom alone the rest of the community would look for all things: the multitude for direction and dictation in all they had to do; the able and aspiring for personal advancement. to be admitted into the ranks of this bureaucracy, and when admitted, to rise therein, would be the sole objects of ambition. under this regime, not only is the outside public ill-qualified, for want of practical experience, to criticise or check the mode of operation of the bureaucracy, but even if the accidents of despotic or the natural working of popular institutions occasionally raise to the summit a ruler or rulers of reforming inclinations, no reform can be effected which is contrary to the interest of the bureaucracy. such is the melancholy condition of the russian empire, as is shown in the accounts of those who have had sufficient opportunity of observation. the czar himself is powerless against the bureaucratic body; he can send any one of them to siberia, but he cannot govern without them, or against their will. on every decree of his they have a tacit veto, by merely refraining from carrying it into effect. in countries of more advanced civilisation and of a more insurrectionary spirit, the public, accustomed to expect everything to be done for them by the state, or at least to do nothing for themselves without asking from the state not only leave to do it, but even how it is to be done, naturally hold the state responsible for all evil which befalls them, and when the evil exceeds their amount of patience, they rise against the government and make what is called a revolution; whereupon somebody else, with or without legitimate authority from the nation, vaults into the seat, issues his orders to the bureaucracy, and everything goes on much as it did before; the bureaucracy being unchanged, and nobody else being capable of taking their place.
when government interference wouldn't involve any infringement of liberty, it may still be objected to on either of three grounds. (1) the first is when the thing to be done is likely to be better done by individuals than by the government. speaking generally, no-one is as fit to conduct a business or decide how or by whom it shall be conducted as are those whose personal interests are involved in it. this principle condemns the interferences (once so common) of the legislature or the officers of government in the ordinary processes of industry. but this matter has been sufficiently enlarged on by political economists, and is not particularly related to the principles of this essay. (2) the second objection has more to do with our subject. in many cases, though individuals may not on average do the particular thing as well as the officers of government would, it is nevertheless desirable that it should be done by them as a means to their own mental education a way of strengthening their active faculties, exercising their judgment, and giving them a familiar knowledge of the subjects with which they are thus left to deal. though not the only reason, this is a chief reason for jury trials in cases that aren't political; for free and popular local and municipal institutions; for having industrial and philanthropic enterprises run by voluntary associations. these aren't questions of liberty, and are connected with that subject only by remote tendencies; but they are questions of development. this is not the place to go at length into these things as parts of national education; as being indeed the special training of a citizen, the practical part of the political education of a free people, taking them out of the narrow circle of personal and family selfishness, getting them used to the wider view of joint interests, the management of joint concerns habituating them to act from public or semi-public motives and guide their conduct by aims that unite them instead of isolating them from one another. without these habits and powers, a free constitution can neither be worked nor preserved, as is illustrated by the too-often transitory nature of political freedom in countries where it doesn't rest on a sufficient basis of local liberties. the management of purely local business by the localities, and of the great enterprises of industry by the union of those who voluntarily put up the money for them, is further recommended by all the advantages that i have presented as belonging to individuality of development and variety in ways of acting. government operations tend to be everywhere alike. with individuals and voluntary associations, on the other hand, there are varied experiments and endless diversity of experience. the state can usefully make itself a central depository of the experience resulting from many trials, and actively circulate and diffuse knowledge about what that experience has shown. its business is to enable each experimenter to benefit by the experiments of others, instead of tolerating no experiments but its own. (3) the third and most powerful reason for restricting the interference of government is the great evil of adding unnecessarily to its power. every function added to those already exercised by the government causes its influence over hopes and fears to be more widely diffused, and increasingly converts the active and ambitious part of the public into hangers-on of the government, or of some party that aims at becoming the government. if the roads, the railways, the banks, the insurance offices, the great joint-stock companies, the universities, and the public charities, were all branches of the government; if in addition the municipal corporations and local boards, with all that they now do, became departments of the central administration; and if the employees of all these different enterprises were appointed and paid by the government, and looked to the government for every promotion or pay-increase, not all the freedom of the press and democratic constitution of the legislature would make this or any other country free except in name. and the more efficiently and scientifically the administrative machinery was constructed the more skillful the arrangements for obtaining the best qualified hands and heads with which to work it the greater the harm it would do. in england it has recently been proposed that all the members of the government's civil service should be selected by competitive examination, to obtain for those jobs the most intelligent and instructed persons that can be found; and much has been said and written for and against this proposal. one of the arguments most insisted on by its opponents is that a permanent official servant of the state doesn't have good enough prospects of salary and importance to attract the highest talents, which will always be able to find a more inviting career in the professions, or in the service of companies and other public bodies. it would not have been surprising if this argument had been used by the friends of the proposition, as an answer to its principal difficulty. it is certainly strange coming from the opponents! what is urged as an objection is really the safety-valve of the proposed system. if indeed all the high talent of the country could be drawn into the service of the government, a proposal tending to bring about that result might well cause uneasiness. if every part of the business of society that required organized co-operation or large and comprehensive views were in the hands of the government, and if government posts were always filled by the ablest men, almost all the enlarged culture and practised intelligence in the country would be concentrated in a numerous bureaucracy, to whom alone the rest of the community would look for all things: the mass of people for direction and dictation in all they had to do; able and aspiring people for personal advancement. (i said almost all. the exception would be the intelligence and ability of scientists and scholars.) the sole objects of ambition would be to be admitted into the ranks of this bureaucracy and to rise in it. under this regime, government that badly needs changing will not be changed. the outside public doesn't have the practical experience it needs to be qualified to criticize or check the mode of operation of the bureaucracy. and even if the accidents of despotism or the natural working of democratic institutions occasionally raise to the summit a ruler or rulers who want to reform the government, no reform can be carried out that is contrary to the interests of the bureaucracy. that is the sad condition of the russian empire, as is shown in the accounts of those who have had a good enough opportunity to observe it. the czar himself is powerless against the bureaucratic body: he can send any one of them to siberia, but he can't govern without them or against their will. on every decree of his they have a tacit veto, which they can exercise by merely not carrying the decree into effect. in countries of more advanced civilization and of a more revolutionary spirit the public, accustomed to expect everything to be done for them by the state, or at least to do nothing for themselves without asking the state not only for permission to do it but even how it is to be done, naturally hold the state responsible for everything bad that happens to them; and when things become worse than they are willing to put up with, they rise against the government and make what is called a revolution; whereupon somebody else, with or without legitimate authority from the nation, leaps into the seat of power, issues his orders to the bureaucracy, and everything goes on much as it did before the bureaucracy being unchanged, and nobody else being capable of taking their place.

a very different spectacle is exhibited among a people accustomed to transact their own business. in france, a large part of the people having been engaged in military service, many of whom have held at least the rank of non-commissioned officers, there are in every popular insurrection several persons competent to take the lead, and improvise some tolerable plan of action. what the french are in military affairs, the americans are in every kind of civil business; let them be left without a government, every body of americans is able to improvise one, and to carry on that or any other public business with a sufficient amount of intelligence, order, and decision. this is what every free people ought to be: and a people capable of this is certain to be free; it will never let itself be enslaved by any man or body of men because these are able to seize and pull the reins of the central administration. no bureaucracy can hope to make such a people as this do or undergo anything that they do not like. but where everything is done through the bureaucracy, nothing to which the bureaucracy is really adverse can be done at all. the constitution of such countries is an organisation of the experience and practical ability of the nation, into a disciplined body for the purpose of governing the rest; and the more perfect that organisation is in itself, the more successful in drawing to itself and educating for itself the persons of greatest capacity from all ranks of the community, the more complete is the bondage of all, the members of the bureaucracy included. for the governors are as much the slaves of their organisation and discipline, as the governed are of the governors. a chinese mandarin is as much the tool and creature of a despotism as the humblest cultivator. an individual jesuit is to the utmost degree of abasement the slave of his order, though the order itself exists for the collective power and importance of its members.
a very different scene appears among a people accustomed to transact their own business. in france a large part of the people have been engaged in military service, many having held at least the rank of noncommissioned officers; so in every popular uprising there are several persons competent to take the lead and improvise some reasonable plan of action. what the french are in military affairs, the americans are in every kind of civil business: leave them without a government and every group of americans is able to improvise one and to carry on that or any other public business with a sufficient amount of intelligence, order and decision. this is what every free people ought to be; and a people capable of this is certain to be free; it will never let itself be enslaved by any man or group of men who can take control only because they are able to seize and pull the reins of the central administration. no bureaucracy can hope to make such a people as this do or undergo anything that they don't like. but where everything is done through the bureaucracy, nothing to which the bureaucracy is really opposed can be done at all. the constitution of such countries is an organization of the experience and practical ability of the nation into a disciplined body for the purpose of governing the rest; and the more perfect that organization is in itself, the more successful in drawing to itself and educating for its own purposes the ablest people from all ranks of the community, the more complete is the bondage of everyone including the members of the bureaucracy. for the governors are as much the slaves of their organization and discipline as the governed are slaves of the governors. a chinese mandarin is as much the tool and creature of a despotism as the humblest peasant. an individual jesuit is to the utmost degree of abasement the slave of his order the society of jesus although the order itself exists for the collective power and importance of its members.

it is not, also, to be forgotten, that the absorption of all the principal ability of the country into the governing body is fatal, sooner or later, to the mental activity and progressiveness of the body itself. banded together as they are working a system which, like all systems, necessarily proceeds in a great measure by fixed rules the official body are under the constant temptation of sinking into indolent routine, or, if they now and then desert that mill-horse round, of rushing into some half-examined crudity which has struck the fancy of some leading member of the corps: and the sole check to these closely allied, though seemingly opposite, tendencies, the only stimulus which can keep the ability of the body itself up to a high standard, is liability to the watchful criticism of equal ability outside the body. it is indispensable, therefore, that the means should exist, independently of the government, of forming such ability, and furnishing it with the opportunities and experience necessary for a correct judgment of great practical affairs. if we would possess permanently a skilful and efficient body of functionaries above all, a body able to originate and willing to adopt improvements; if we would not have our bureaucracy degenerate into a pedantocracy, this body must not engross all the occupations which form and cultivate the faculties required for the government of mankind.
it should also be borne in mind that the absorption of all the principal ability of the country into the governing body is fatal, sooner or later, to the mental activity and progressiveness of the governing body itself. its members are banded together, working a system which (like all systems) has to proceed to a large extent by fixed rules; and this puts them under the constant temptation of sinking into lazy routine, and if they occasionally desert that blinkered trudge along the same old path they have the temptation to rush into some half-examined crudity that has struck the fancy of some leading member of the corps. and the only guard against these closely allied (though seemingly opposite) tendencies, the only stimulus that can keep the ability of the governing body itself up to a high standard, is its being open to the watchful criticism of equally able people outside the body. so it is indispensable that there should be some way, independently of the government, of having such able people and giving them the opportunities and experience necessary for a correct judgment of great practical affairs. if we do want to have permanently a skillful and efficient body of officials, above all, a body that can come up with original ideas and is willing to adopt improvements, and if we don't want our bureaucracy to degenerate into a pedantocracy, this body mustn't absorb into itself all the occupations that form and cultivate the skills required for the government of mankind.

to determine the point at which evils, so formidable to human freedom and advancement, begin, or rather at which they begin to predominate over the benefits attending the collective application of the force of society, under its recognised chiefs, for the removal of the obstacles which stand in the way of its well-being; to secure as much of the advantages of centralised power and intelligence, as can be had without turning into governmental channels too great a proportion of the general activity, is one of the most difficult and complicated questions in the art of government. it is, in a great measure, a question of detail, in which many and various considerations must be kept in view, and no absolute rule can be laid down. but i believe that the practical principle in which safety resides, the ideal to be kept in view, the standard by which to test all arrangements intended for overcoming the difficulty, may be conveyed in these words: the greatest dissemination of power consistent with efficiency; but the greatest possible centralisation of information, and diffusion of it from the centre. thus, in municipal administration, there would be, as in the new england states, a very minute division among separate officers, chosen by the localities, of all business which is not better left to the persons directly interested; but besides this, there would be, in each department of local affairs, a central superintendence, forming a branch of the general government. the organ of this superintendence would concentrate, as in a focus, the variety of information and experience derived from the conduct of that branch of public business in all the localities, from everything analogous which is done in foreign countries, and from the general principles of political science. this central organ should have a right to know all that is done, and its special duty should be that of making the knowledge acquired in one place available for others. emancipated from the petty prejudices and narrow views of a locality by its elevated position and comprehensive sphere of observation, its advice would naturally carry much authority; but its actual power, as a permanent institution, should, i conceive, be limited to compelling the local officers to obey the laws laid down for their guidance. in all things not provided for by general rules, those officers should be left to their own judgment, under responsibility to their constituents. for the violation of rules, they should be responsible to law, and the rules themselves should be laid down by the legislature; the central administrative authority only watching over their execution, and if they were not properly carried into effect, appealing, according to the nature of the case, to the tribunal to enforce the law, or to the constituencies to dismiss the functionaries who had not executed it according to its spirit. such, in its general conception, is the central superintendence which the poor law board is intended to exercise over the administrators of the poor rate throughout the country. whatever powers the board exercises beyond this limit, were right and necessary in that peculiar case, for the cure of rooted habits of maladministration in matters deeply affecting not the localities merely, but the whole community; since no locality has a moral right to make itself by mismanagement a nest of pauperism, necessarily overflowing into other localities, and impairing the moral and physical condition of the whole labouring community. the powers of administrative coercion and subordinate legislation possessed by the poor law board (but which, owing to the state of opinion on the subject, are very scantily exercised by them), though perfectly justifiable in a case of first-rate national interest, would be wholly out of place in the superintendence of interests purely local. but a central organ of information and instruction for all the localities, would be equally valuable in all departments of administration. a government cannot have too much of the kind of activity which does not impede, but aids and stimulates, individual exertion and development. the mischief begins when, instead of calling forth the activity and powers of individuals and bodies, it substitutes its own activity for theirs; when, instead of informing, advising, and, upon occasion, denouncing, it makes them work in fetters, or bids them stand aside and does their work instead of them. the worth of a state, in the long run, is the worth of the individuals composing it; and a state which postpones the interests of their mental expansion and elevation, to a little more of administrative skill, or of that semblance of it which practice gives, in the details of business; a state which dwarfs its men, in order that they may be more docile instruments in its hands even for beneficial purposes, will find that with small men no great thing can really be accomplished; and that the perfection of machinery to which it has sacrificed everything, will in the end avail it nothing, for want of the vital power which, in order that the machine might work more smoothly, it has preferred to banish.
so we have on one side the evils in over-large government, evils that are so formidable to human freedom and advancement; and on the other side the benefits that come from the collective application of the force of society (under its recognized leaders) for removing obstacles to its well-being. this gives us a question of balance, the question of how to secure as much of the advantages of centralized power and intelligence as possible without handing over to the government too great a proportion of the society's activity. in brief: at what point do the evils start to predominate over the benefits? this is one of the most difficult and complicated questions in the business of government. it is largely a question of detail, in which many and various considerations must be kept in view and no absolute rule can be laid down. but i believe that the practical principle that is needed for us to stay safe, the ideal to be kept in view, the standard by which to test all arrangements intended for overcoming the difficulty, can be expressed thus: the greatest dissemination of power consistent with efficiency, but the greatest possible centralization of information, and diffusion of it from the centre. applying the former of these would give a result like that in the new england states: all business that wouldn't be better left to the individuals directly concerned would be distributed amongst a large number of public officials, chosen by the localities. and, applying the second of the two rules of thumb, each branch of local affairs would he superintended centrally by a branch of the general government; and the superintending body would act like a lens, concentrating the variety of information and experience derived from the conduct of that branch of public business in all the localities, from everything analogous that is done in foreign countries, and from the general principles of political science. this central organization should have a right to know all that is done, and a special duty to make the knowledge acquired in one place available for others. freed from the petty prejudices and narrow views of a locality by its elevated position and wide sphere of observation, its advice would naturally carry much authority; but its actual power as a permanent institution should, in my view, be limited to compelling the local officers to obey the laws laid down for their guidance. in everything not provided for by general rules, those officers should be left to their own judgment, under responsibility to their constituents. for the violation of rules they should be answerable to the law, and the rules themselves should be laid down by the legislature; the central administrative authority only watching over whether they are obeyed and if they are not appealing to the courts to enforce the law or (as the case may be) appealing to the local constituencies to dismiss the officials who haven't acted in the spirit of the law. that is the general conception of how the poor law board is intended to superintend the administrators of the poor rate in separate localities throughout this country. whatever powers the board has exercised beyond this limit were right and necessary in that particular case, to cure maladministration in matters deeply affecting not merely the localities but the whole country; since no locality has a moral right to mismanage in such a way as to turn itself into a nest of pauperism, necessarily overflowing into other localities and worsening the moral and physical condition of the whole labouring community. the poor law board has powers of administrative coercion and subordinate legislation which, owing to the state of opinion on the subject, it doesn't use much. it is perfectly justifiable in using them in a case where the national interest is significantly involved, but they would be wholly out of place in the supervision of purely local interests. but a central organ of information and instruction for all the localities would be equally valuable in all branches of administration. a government can't have too much of the kind of activity that positively aids and stimulates individual effort and development. the trouble starts when instead of arousing the activity and powers of individuals and bodies it substitutes its own activity for theirs; when, instead of informing, advising, and sometimes denouncing, it makes them work in chains or orders them to stand aside while it does their work for them. the worth of a state in the long run is the worth of the individuals composing it. a state that dwarfs its individuals in order to make them easier to lead will find even if it wanted to lead for beneficial purposes that with small men no great thing can really be accomplished. and a state that makes the interests of the individuals mental expansion and elevation subordinate to having a little more administrative skill (or the semblance of it that practice gives) in the details of business will eventually find that the perfection of machinery to which it has sacrificed everything will do no good, because of the lack of the vital power which, in order that the machine might work more smoothly, it has preferred to banish.

chapter i. general remarks.
chapter 1: general remarks

there are few circumstances among those which make up the present condition of human knowledge, more unlike what might have been expected, or more significant of the backward state in which speculation on the most important subjects still lingers, than the little progress which has been made in the decision of the controversy respecting the criterion of right and wrong. from the dawn of philosophy, the question concerning the summum bonum, or, what is the same thing, concerning the foundation of morality, has been accounted the main problem in speculative thought, has occupied the most gifted intellects, and divided them into sects and schools, carrying on a vigorous warfare against one another. and after more than two thousand years the same discussions continue, philosophers are still ranged under the same contending banners, and neither thinkers nor mankind at large seem nearer to being unanimous on the subject, than when the youth socrates listened to the old protagoras, and asserted (if plato's dialogue be grounded on a real conversation) the theory of utilitarianism against the popular morality of the so-called sophist.
little progress has been made towards deciding the controversy concerning the criterion of right and wrong. among all the facts about the present condition of human knowledge, the state of this controversy is most unlike what might have been expected and most indicative significant of the backward state in which theorizing on the most important subjects still lingers. that is how little progress has been made! from the dawn of philosophy the question concerning the summum bonum or, what is the same thing, concerning the foundation of morality, has been regarded as the main problem in speculative thought, occupied the most gifted intellects, and divided them into sects and schools, vigorously warring against one another. and after more than two thousand years the same discussions continue! philosophers still line up under the same opposing battle-flags, and neither thinkers nor people in general seem to be any nearer to being unanimous on the subject than when young socrates listened to old protagoras and asserted the theory of utilitarianism against the popular morality of the so-called sophist (i'm assuming here that plato's dialogue is based on a real conversation).

it is true that similar confusion and uncertainty, and in some cases similar discordance, exist respecting the first principles of all the sciences, not excepting that which is deemed the most certain of them, mathematics; without much impairing, generally indeed without impairing at all, the trustworthiness of the conclusions of those sciences. an apparent anomaly, the explanation of which is, that the detailed doctrines of a science are not usually deduced from, nor depend for their evidence upon, what are called its first principles. were it not so, there would be no science more precarious, or whose conclusions were more insufficiently made out, than algebra; which derives none of its certainty from what are commonly taught to learners as its elements, since these, as laid down by some of its most eminent teachers, are as full of fictions as english law, and of mysteries as theology. the truths which are ultimately accepted as the first principles of a science, are really the last results of metaphysical analysis, practised on the elementary notions with which the science is conversant; and their relation to the science is not that of foundations to an edifice, but of roots to a tree, which may perform their office equally well though they be never dug down to and exposed to light. but though in science the particular truths precede the general theory, the contrary might be expected to be the case with a practical art, such as morals or legislation. all action is for the sake of some end, and rules of action, it seems natural to suppose, must take their whole character and colour from the end to which they are subservient. when we engage in a pursuit, a clear and precise conception of what we are pursuing would seem to be the first thing we need, instead of the last we are to look forward to. a test of right and wrong must be the means, one would think, of ascertaining what is right or wrong, and not a consequence of having already ascertained it.
it is true that similar confusion and uncertainty, and in some cases similar disagreements, exist concerning the basic principles of all the sciences even including the one that is thought to be the most certain of them, namely mathematics without doing much harm, and usually without doing any harm, to the trustworthiness of the conclusions of those sciences. this seems odd, but it can be explained: the detailed doctrines of a science usually are not deduced from what are called its first principles and don't need those principles to make them evident. if this weren't so, there would be no science more precarious, and none whose conclusions were more weakly based, than algebra. this doesn't get any of its certainty from what are commonly taught to learners as its elements or first principles, because these, as laid down by some of its most eminent teachers, are as full of fictions as english law and as full of mysteries as theology. the truths that are ultimately accepted as the first principles of a science are really the last results of metaphysical analysis of the basic notions that are involve in the science in question. their relation to the science is not that of foundations to a building but of roots to a tree, which can do their job equally well if they are never dug down to and exposed to light. but though in science the particular truths precede the general theory, the reverse of that might be expected with a practical art such as morals or legislation. all action is for the sake of some end; and it seems natural to suppose that rules of action must take their whole character and colour from the end at which actions aim. when we are pursuing something, a clear and precise conception of what we are pursuing would seem to be the first thing we need, rather than being the last we are to look forward to. one would think that a test or criterion of right and wrong must be the means of discovering what is right or wrong, and not a consequence of having already discovered this.

the difficulty is not avoided by having recourse to the popular theory of a natural faculty, a sense or instinct, informing us of right and wrong. for besides that the existence of such a moral instinct is itself one of the matters in dispute those believers in it who have any pretensions to philosophy, have been obliged to abandon the idea that it discerns what is right or wrong in the particular case in hand, as our other senses discern the sight or sound actually present. our moral faculty, according to all those of its interpreters who are entitled to the name of thinkers, supplies us only with the general principles of moral judgments; it is a branch of our reason, not of our sensitive faculty; and must be looked to for the abstract doctrines of morality, not for perception of it in the concrete. the intuitive, no less than what may be termed the inductive, school of ethics, insists on the necessity of general laws. they both agree that the morality of an individual action is not a question of direct perception, but of the application of a law to an individual case. they recognise also, to a great extent, the same moral laws; but differ as to their evidence, and the source from which they derive their authority. according to the one opinion, the principles of morals are evident a priori, requiring nothing to command assent, except that the meaning of the terms be understood. according to the other doctrine, right and wrong, as well as truth and falsehood, are questions of observation and experience. but both hold equally that morality must be deduced from principles; and the intuitive school affirm as strongly as the inductive, that there is a science of morals. yet they seldom attempt to make out a list of the a
the difficulty can't be avoided by bringing in the popular theory of a natural moral faculty, a sense or instinct informing us of right and wrong. for one thing, the criterion dispute includes a dispute about whether there is any such moral instinct. and, anyway, believers in it who have any philosophical ability have been obliged to abandon the idea that it the moral faculty or moral sense or moral intuition picks out what is right or wrong in this or that particular case in the way that our other senses pick up the sight or sound that is actually present in the particular concrete situation. our moral faculty, according to all those of its friends who are entitled to count as thinkers, supplies us only with the general principles of moral judgments; it belongs with reason and not with sense-perception; what we can expect from it are the abstract doctrines of morality, and not the perception of morality in particular concrete situations. the intuitionist school of ethics insists on the necessity of general laws just as much as does the inductive school (as we might label it). they both agree that knowing the morality of an individual action is not a matter of direct perception but of the application of a law to an individual case. the two schools mostly agree also in what moral laws they recognize; but they differ on what makes those moral laws evident, and what give them their authority.

priori principles which are to serve as the premises of the science; still more rarely do they make any effort to reduce those various principles to one first principle, or common ground of obligation. they either assume the ordinary precepts of morals as of a priori authority, or they lay down as the common groundwork of those maxims, some generality much less obviously authoritative than the maxims themselves, and which has never succeeded in gaining popular acceptance. yet to support their pretensions there ought either to be some one fundamental principle or law, at the root of all morality, or if there be several, there should be a determinate order of precedence among them; and the one principle, or the rule for deciding between the various principles when they conflict, ought to be self-evident.
according to the intuitionists, the principles of morals are evident a priori: if you know the meanings of the terms in which they are expressed, you'll have to assent to them. according to the inductivists, right and wrong are questions of observation and experience just as truth and falsehood are. but both schools hold equally that morality must be deduced from principles; and the intuitive school affirm as strongly as the inductive does that there is a science of morals i.e. an organized system containing basic axioms from which the rest can be rigorously deduced. yet they seldom attempt to provide a list of the a priori principles that are to serve as the premises of the science; and they almost never make any effort to reduce those various principles to one first principle, one first all-purpose ground of obligation. instead, they either treat the ordinary precepts of morals as though they had a priori authority or lay down as the all-purpose groundwork of those maxims some general moral principle that is much less obviously authoritative than the maxims themselves and hasn't ever been widely accepted. yet to support their claims there ought to be one fundamental principle or law at the root of all morality; or if there are several of them, they should be clearly rank-ordered in relation to one another, and there should be a self-evident principle or rule for deciding amongst them when they conflict in a particular case.

to inquire how far the bad effects of this deficiency have been mitigated in practice, or to what extent the moral beliefs of mankind have been vitiated or made uncertain by the absence of any distinct recognition of an ultimate standard, would imply a complete survey and criticism of past and present ethical doctrine. it would, however, be easy to show that whatever steadiness or consistency these moral beliefs have attained, has been mainly due to the tacit influence of a standard not recognised. although the non-existence of an acknowledged first principle has made ethics not so much a guide as a consecration of men's actual sentiments, still, as men's sentiments, both of favour and of aversion, are greatly influenced by what they suppose to be the effects of things upon their happiness, the principle of utility, or as bentham latterly called it, the greatest happiness principle, has had a large share in forming the moral doctrines even of those who most scornfully reject its authority. nor is there any school of thought which refuses to admit that the influence of actions on happiness is a most material and even predominant consideration in many of the details of morals, however unwilling to acknowledge it as the fundamental principle of morality, and the source of moral obligation. i might go much further, and say that to all those a priori moralists who deem it necessary to argue at all, utilitarian arguments are indispensable. it is not my present purpose to criticise these thinkers; but i cannot help referring, for illustration, to a systematic treatise by one of the most illustrious of them, the metaphysics of ethics, by kant. this remarkable man, whose system of thought will long remain one of the landmarks in the history of philosophical speculation, does, in the treatise in question, lay down an universal first principle as the origin and ground of moral obligation; it is this: so act, that the rule on which thou actest would admit of being adopted as a law by all rational beings. but when he begins to deduce from this precept any of the actual duties of morality, he fails, almost grotesquely, to show that there would be any contradiction, any logical (not to say physical) impossibility, in the adoption by all rational beings of the most outrageously immoral rules of conduct. all he shows is that the consequences of their universal adoption would be such as no one would choose to incur.
the lack of any clear recognition of an ultimate standard may have corrupted the moral beliefs of mankind or made them uncertain; on the other hand, the bad effects of this deficiency may have been moderated in practice. to determine how far things have gone in the former way and how far in the latter would require a complete critical survey of past and present ethical doctrine. but it wouldn't be hard to show that whatever steadiness or consistency mankind's moral beliefs have achieved has been mainly due to the silent influence of a standard that hasn't been consciously recognised. in the absence of an acknowledged first principle, ethics has been not so much a guide to men in forming their moral views as a consecration of the views they actually have; but men's views both for and against are greatly influenced by what effects on their happiness they suppose things to have; and so the principle of utility or, as bentham eventually called it, the greatest happiness principle has had a large share in forming the moral doctrines even of those who most scornfully reject its authority. and every school of thought admits that the influence of actions on happiness is a very significant and even predominant consideration in many of the details of morals, however unwilling they may be to allow the production of happiness as the fundamental principle of morality and the source of moral obligation. i might go much further and say that a priori moralists can't do without utilitarian arguments (i am not talking about the ones who don't think they need to argue at all!). it is not my present purpose to criticise these thinkers; but i can't refrain from bringing in as an illustration a systematic treatise by one of the most illustrious of the a priori moralists, the metaphysics of ethics by kant. this remarkable man, whose system of thought will long remain one of the landmarks in the history of philosophical thought, lays down in that treatise a universal first principle as the origin and ground of moral obligation: act in such a way that the rule on which you act could be adopted as a law by all rational beings. but when he begins to derive any of the actual duties of morality from this principle he fails, almost grotesquely, to show that there would be any contradiction any logical impossibility, or even any physical impossibility in the adoption by all rational beings of the most outrageously immoral rules of conduct. all he shows is that the universal adoption of such rules would have consequences that no-one would choose to bring about.

on the present occasion, i shall, without further discussion of the other theories, attempt to contribute something towards the understanding and appreciation of the utilitarian or happiness theory, and towards such proof as it is susceptible of. it is evident that this cannot be proof in the ordinary and popular meaning of the term. questions of ultimate ends are not amenable to direct proof. whatever can be proved to be good, must be so by being shown to be a means to something admitted to be good without proof. the medical art is proved to be good, by its conducing to health; but how is it possible to prove that health is good? the art of music is good, for the reason, among others, that it produces pleasure; but what proof is it possible to give that pleasure is good? if, then, it is asserted that there is a comprehensive formula, including all things which are in themselves good, and that whatever else is good, is not so as an end, but as a mean, the formula may be accepted or rejected, but is not a subject of what is commonly understood by proof. we are not, however, to infer that its acceptance or rejection must depend on blind impulse, or arbitrary choice. there is a larger meaning of the word proof, in which this question is as amenable to it as any other of the disputed questions of philosophy. the subject is within the cognizance of the rational faculty; and neither does that faculty deal with it solely in the way of intuition. considerations may be presented capable of determining the intellect either to give or withhold its assent to the doctrine; and this is equivalent to proof.
in the present work i shall, without further discussion of the other theories, try to contribute something towards the understanding and appreciation of the utilitarian or happiness theory, and towards such proof as it can be given. obviously this can't be proof in the ordinary and popular meaning of that word. questions about ultimate ends can't be settled by direct proof. you can prove something to be good only by showing that it is a means to something that is admitted without proof to be good. the art of medicine is proved to be good by its conducing to health, but how is it possible to prove that health is good? the art of music is good because (among other reasons) it produces pleasure, but what proof could be given that pleasure is good? so if it is claimed that there is a comprehensive formula that covers everything that is good in itself, and whatever else is good is not good as an end but as a means to something that is covered by the formula, the formula may be accepted or rejected but it can't be given what is commonly called a proof. but we shouldn't infer that its acceptance or rejection must depend on blind impulse or arbitrary choice. there is a broader meaning of the word proof in which this question is as capable of being settled by proof as any other of the disputed questions in philosophy. the subject is within reach of the faculty of reason, which doesn't deal with it solely by moral intuitions such as the intuitionists believe in. considerations can be presented that are capable of determining the intellect either to give or withhold its assent to the doctrine; and this is equivalent to proof.

we shall examine presently of what nature are these considerations; in what manner they apply to the case, and what rational grounds, therefore, can be given for accepting or rejecting the utilitarian formula. but it is a preliminary condition of rational acceptance or rejection, that the formula should be correctly understood. i believe that the very imperfect notion ordinarily formed of its meaning, is the chief obstacle which impedes its reception; and that could it be cleared, even from only the grosser misconceptions, the question would be greatly simplified, and a large proportion of its difficulties removed. before, therefore, i attempt to enter into the philosophical grounds which can be given for assenting to the utilitarian standard, i shall offer some illustrations of the doctrine itself; with the view of showing more clearly what it is, distinguishing it from what it is not, and disposing of such of the practical objections to it as either originate in, or are closely connected with, mistaken interpretations of its meaning. having thus prepared the ground, i shall afterwards endeavour to throw such light as i can upon the question, considered as one of philosophical theory.
we shall examine presently what sort of thing these considerations are and how they apply to the question at hand. in doing this we shall be examining what rational grounds can be given for accepting or rejecting the utilitarian formula. but if there is to be rational acceptance or rejection, the formula should first be correctly understood. i believe that the chief obstacle to acceptance of the utilitarian principle has been people's very imperfect grasp of its meaning, and that if the misunderstandings of it or even just the very gross ones could be cleared up, the question would be greatly simplified and a large proportion of its difficulties removed. so before i embark on the philosophical grounds that can be given for assenting to the utilitarian standard, i shall offer some illustrations of the doctrine itself; aiming to show more clearly what it is, distinguish it from what it is not, and dispose of such of the practical objections to it as come from or are closely connected with mistaken interpretations of its meaning. having thus prepared the ground, i shall afterwards try to throw as much light as i can on the question, considered as one of philosophical theory.

chapter ii. what utilitarianism is.
chapter 2: what utilitarianism is

a passing remark is all that needs be given to the ignorant blunder of supposing that those who stand up for utility as the test of right and wrong, use the term in that restricted and merely colloquial sense in which utility is opposed to pleasure. an apology is due to the philosophical opponents of utilitarianism, for even the momentary appearance of confounding them with any one capable of so absurd a misconception; which is the more extraordinary, inasmuch as the contrary accusation, of referring everything to pleasure, and that too in its grossest form, is another of the common charges against utilitarianism: and, as has been pointedly remarked by an able writer, the same sort of persons, and often the very same persons, denounce the theory as impracticably dry when the word utility precedes the word pleasure, and as too practicably voluptuous when the word pleasure precedes the word utility. those who know anything about the matter are aware that every writer, from epicurus to bentham, who maintained the theory of utility, meant by it, not something to be contradistinguished from pleasure, but pleasure itself, together with exemption from pain; and instead of opposing the useful to the agreeable or the ornamental, have always declared that the useful means these, among other things. yet the common herd, including the herd of writers, not only in newspapers and periodicals, but in books of weight and pretension, are perpetually falling into this shallow mistake. having caught up the word utilitarian, while knowing nothing whatever about it but its sound, they habitually express by it the rejection, or the neglect, of pleasure in some of its forms; of beauty, of ornament, or of amusement. nor is the term thus ignorantly misapplied solely in disparagement, but occasionally in compliment; as though it implied superiority to frivolity and the mere pleasures of the moment. and this perverted use is the only one in which the word is popularly known, and the one from which the new generation are acquiring their sole notion of its meaning. those who introduced the word, but who had for many years discontinued it as a distinctive appellation, may well feel themselves called upon to resume it, if by doing so they can hope to contribute anything towards rescuing it from this utter degradation.
some people have supposed that those who stand up for utility as the test of right and wrong use that term in the restricted and merely colloquial sense in which utility is opposed to pleasure. a passing remark is all that needs to be given to that ignorant blunder. i owe an apology to the philosophical opponents of utilitarianism for even briefly seeming to regard them as capable of so absurd a misunderstanding. the blunder is all the more extraordinary given that another of the common charges against utilitarianism is the opposite accusation that it bases everything on pleasure (understood very crudely). one able writer has pointedly remarked that the same sort of persons, and often the very same persons, denounce the theory as impracticably dry when the word utility precedes the word pleasure, and as too practicably voluptuous when the word pleasure precedes the word utility ! those who know anything about the matter are aware that every writer from epicurus to bentham who maintained the theory of utility meant by it not something to be contrasted with pleasure but pleasure itself together with freedom from pain; and instead of opposing the useful to the agreeable or the ornamental, they have always declared that useful includes these among other things. yet the common herd, including the herd of writers not only in newspapers and magazines but in intellectually ambitious books are perpetually falling into this shallow mistake. having caught up the word utilitarian, while knowing nothing whatever about it but its sound, they habitually express by it keeping out or neglecting pleasure in some of its forms, such as beauty, ornament and amusement. and when the term utility is ignorantly misused in this way, it isn't always in criticism of utilitarianism; occasionally it occurs when utilitarianism is being complimented, the idea being that utility is something superior to frivolity and the mere pleasures of the moment, whereas really it includes them. this perverted use is the only one in which the word utility is popularly known, and the one from which the young are now getting their sole notion of its meaning. those who introduced the word, but who had for many years stopped using it as a doctrinal label, may well feel themselves called upon to resume it, if by doing so they can hope to contribute anything towards rescuing it from this utter degradation.

the creed which accepts as the foundation of morals, utility, or the greatest happiness principle, holds that actions are right in proportion as they tend to promote happiness, wrong as they tend to produce the reverse of happiness. by happiness is intended pleasure, and the absence of pain; by unhappiness, pain, and the privation of pleasure. to give a clear view of the moral standard set up by the theory, much more requires to be said; in particular, what things it includes in the ideas of pain and pleasure; and to what extent this is left an open question. but these supplementary explanations do not affect the theory of life on which this theory of morality is grounded namely, that pleasure, and freedom from pain, are the only things desirable as ends; and that all desirable things (which are as numerous in the utilitarian as in any other scheme) are desirable either for the pleasure inherent in themselves, or as means to the promotion of pleasure and the prevention of pain.
the doctrine that the basis of morals is utility, or the greatest happiness principle, holds that actions are right in proportion as they tend to promote happiness, wrong in proportion as they tend to produce the reverse of happiness. by happiness is meant pleasure and the absence of pain; by unhappiness is meant pain and the lack of pleasure. to give a clear view of the moral standard set up by the theory, much more needs to be said, especially about what things the doctrine includes in the ideas of pain and pleasure, and to what extent it leaves this as an open question. but these supplementary explanations don't affect the theory of life on which this theory of morality is based namely the thesis that pleasure and freedom from pain are the only things that are desirable as ends, and that everything that is desirable at all is so either for the pleasure inherent in it or as means to the promotion of pleasure and the prevention of pain.

now, such a theory of life excites in many minds, and among them in some of the most estimable in feeling and purpose, inveterate dislike. to suppose that life has (as they express it) no higher end than pleasure no better and nobler object of desire and pursuit they designate as utterly mean and grovelling; as a doctrine worthy only of swine, to whom the followers of epicurus were, at a very early period, contemptuously likened; and modern holders of the doctrine are occasionally made the subject of equally polite comparisons by its german, french, and english assailants.
(the utilitarian system has as many things that are desirable, in one way or the other, as any other theory of morality.) now, such a theory of life arouses utter dislike in many minds, including some that are among the most admirable in feeling and purpose. the view that life has (as they express it) no higher end no better and nobler object of desire and pursuit than pleasure they describe as utterly mean and grovelling, a doctrine worthy only of pigs. the followers of epicurus were contemptuously compared with pigs, very early on, and modern holders of the utilitarian doctrine are occasionally subjected to equally polite comparisons by its german, french, and english opponents. higher and lower pleasures

when thus attacked, the epicureans have always answered, that it is not they, but their accusers, who represent human nature in a degrading light; since the accusation supposes human beings to be capable of no pleasures except those of which swine are capable. if this supposition were true, the charge could not be gainsaid, but would then be no longer an imputation; for if the sources of pleasure were precisely the same to human beings and to swine, the rule of life which is good enough for the one would be good enough for the other. the comparison of the epicurean life to that of beasts is felt as degrading, precisely because a beast's pleasures do not satisfy a human being's conceptions of happiness. human beings have faculties more elevated than the animal appetites, and when once made conscious of them, do not regard anything as happiness which does not include their gratification. i do not, indeed, consider the epicureans to have been by any means faultless in drawing out their scheme of consequences from the utilitarian principle. to do this in any sufficient manner, many stoic, as well as christian elements require to be included. but there is no known epicurean theory of life which does not assign to the pleasures of the intellect; of the feelings and imagination, and of the moral sentiments, a much higher value as pleasures than to those of mere sensation. it must be admitted, however, that utilitarian writers in general have placed the superiority of mental over bodily pleasures chiefly in the greater permanency, safety, uncostliness, &c., of the former that is, in their circumstantial advantages rather than in their intrinsic nature. and on all these points utilitarians have fully proved their case; but they might have taken the other, and, as it may be called, higher ground, with entire consistency. it is quite compatible with the principle of utility to recognise the fact, that some kinds of pleasure are more desirable and more valuable than others. it would be absurd that while, in estimating all other things, quality is considered as well as quantity, the estimation of pleasures should be supposed to depend on quantity alone.
when attacked in this way, the epicureans have always answered that it is not they but their accusers who represent human nature in a degrading light, because the accusation implies that human beings are capable only of pleasures that pigs are also capable of. if this were true, there'd be no defence against the charge, but then it wouldn't be a charge; for if the sources of pleasure were precisely the same for humans as for pigs, the rule of life that is good enough for them would be good enough for us. the comparison of the epicurean life to that of beasts is felt as degrading precisely because a beast's pleasures do not satisfy a human's conceptions of happiness. human beings have higher faculties than the animal appetites, and once they become conscious of them they don't regard anything as happiness that doesn't include their gratification. admittedly the epicureans were far from faultless in drawing out the consequences of the utilitarian principle; to do this at all adequately one must include which they didn't many stoic and some christian elements. but every epicurean theory of life that we know of assigns to the pleasures of the intellect, of the feelings and imagination and of the moral sentiments a much higher value as pleasures than to those of mere sensation. but it must be admitted that when utilitarian writers have said that mental pleasures are better than bodily ones they have mainly based this on mental pleasures being more permanent, safer, less costly and so on i.e. from their circumstantial advantages rather than from their intrinsic nature. and on all these points utilitarians have fully proved their case; but they could, quite consistently with their basic principle, have taken the other route occupying the higher ground, as we might say. it is quite compatible with the principle of utility to recognise that some kinds of pleasure are more desirable and more valuable than others. in estimating the value of anything else, we take into account quality as well as quantity; it would be absurd if the value of pleasures were supposed to depend on quantity alone.

if i am asked, what i mean by difference of quality in pleasures, or what makes one pleasure more valuable than another, merely as a pleasure, except its being greater in amount, there is but one possible answer. of two pleasures, if there be one to which all or almost all who have experience of both give a decided preference, irrespective of any feeling of moral obligation to prefer it, that is the more desirable pleasure. if one of the two is, by those who are competently acquainted with both, placed so far above the other that they prefer it, even though knowing it to be attended with a greater amount of discontent, and would not resign it for any quantity of the other pleasure which their nature is capable of, we are justified in ascribing to the preferred enjoyment a superiority in quality, so far outweighing quantity as to render it, in comparison, of small account.
what do you mean by difference of quality in pleasures? what, according to you, makes one pleasure more valuable than another, merely as a pleasure, if not its being greater in amount? there is only one possible answer to this. pleasure p1 is more desirable than pleasure p2 if: all or almost all people who have had experience of both give a decided preference to p1, irrespective of any feeling that they ought to prefer it. if those who are competently acquainted with both these pleasures place p1 so far above p2 that they prefer it even when they know that a greater amount of discontent will come with it, and wouldn't give it up in exchange for any quantity of p2 that they are capable of having, we are justified in ascribing to p1 a superiority in quality that so greatly outweighs quantity as to make quantity comparatively negligible.

now it is an unquestionable fact that those who are equally acquainted with, and equally capable of appreciating and enjoying, both, do give a most marked preference to the manner of existence which employs their higher faculties. few human creatures would consent to be changed into any of the lower animals, for a promise of the fullest allowance of a beast's pleasures; no intelligent human being would consent to be a fool, no instructed person would be an ignoramus, no person of feeling and conscience would be selfish and base, even though they should be persuaded that the fool, the dunce, or the rascal is better satisfied with his lot than they are with theirs. they would not resign what they possess more than he, for the most complete satisfaction of all the desires which they have in common with him. if they ever fancy they would, it is only in cases of unhappiness so extreme, that to escape from it they would exchange their lot for almost any other, however undesirable in their own eyes. a being of higher faculties requires more to make him happy, is capable probably of more acute suffering, and is certainly accessible to it at more points, than one of an inferior type; but in spite of these liabilities, he can never really wish to sink into what he feels to be a lower grade of existence. we may give what explanation we please of this unwillingness; we may attribute it to pride, a name which is given indiscriminately to some of the most and to some of the least estimable feelings of which mankind are capable; we may refer it to the love of liberty and personal independence, an appeal to which was with the stoics one of the most effective means for the inculcation of it; to the love of power, or to the love of excitement, both of which do really enter into and contribute to it: but its most appropriate appellation is a sense of dignity, which all human beings possess in one form or other, and in some, though by no means in exact, proportion to their higher faculties, and which is so essential a part of the happiness of those in whom it is strong, that nothing which conflicts with it could be, otherwise than momentarily, an object of desire to them. whoever supposes that this preference takes place at a sacrifice of happiness-that the superior being, in anything like equal circumstances, is not happier than the inferior-confounds the two very different ideas, of happiness, and content. it is indisputable that the being whose capacities of enjoyment are low, has the greatest chance of having them fully satisfied; and a highly-endowed being will always feel that any happiness which he can look for, as the world is constituted, is imperfect. but he can learn to bear its imperfections, if they are at all bearable; and they will not make him envy the being who is indeed unconscious of the imperfections, but only because he feels not at all the good which those imperfections qualify. it is better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better to be socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied. and if the fool, or the pig, is of a different opinion, it is because they only know their own side of the question. the other party to the comparison knows both sides.
now, it is an unquestionable fact that the way of life that employs the higher faculties is strongly preferred to the way of life that caters only to the lower ones by people who are equally acquainted with both and equally capable of appreciating and enjoying both. few human creatures would agree to be changed into any of the lower animals in return for a promise of the fullest allowance of animal pleasures; no intelligent human being would consent to be a fool, no educated person would prefer to be an ignoramus, no person of feeling and conscience would rather be selfish and base, even if they were convinced that the fool, the dunce or the rascal is better satisfied with his life than they are with theirs. if they ever think they would, it is only in cases of unhappiness so extreme that to escape from it they would exchange their situation for almost any other, however undesirable they may think the other to be. someone with higher faculties requires more to make him happy, is probably capable of more acute suffering, and is certainly vulnerable to suffering at more points, than someone of an inferior type; but in spite of these drawbacks he can't ever really wish to sink into what he feels to be a lower grade of existence. explain this unwillingness how you please! we may attribute it to pride, a name that is given indiscriminately to some of the most and to some of the least admirable feelings of which human beings are capable; the love of liberty and personal independence (for the stoics, that was one of the most effective means for getting people to value the higher pleasures); or the love of power, or the love of excitement, both of which really do play a part in it. but the most appropriate label is a sense of dignity. all human beings have this sense in one form or another, and how strongly a person has it is roughly proportional to how well endowed he is with the higher faculties. in those who have a strong sense of dignity, their dignity is so essential to their happiness that they couldn't want, for more than a moment, anything that conflicts with it. anyone who thinks that this preference takes place at a sacrifice of happiness anyone who denies that the superior being is, other things being anywhere near equal, happier than the inferior one is confusing two very different ideas, those of happiness and of contentment. it is true of course that the being whose capacities of enjoyment are low has the greatest chance of having them fully satisfied and thus of being contented; and a highly endowed being will always feel that any happiness that he can look for, given how the world is, is imperfect. but he can learn to bear its imperfections, if they are at all bearable; and they won't make him envy the person who isn't conscious of the imperfections only because he has no sense of the good that those imperfections are imperfections of for example, the person who isn't bothered by the poor quality of the conducting because he doesn't enjoy music anyway. it is better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better to be socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied. and if the fool or the pig think otherwise, that is because they know only their own side of the question. the other party to the comparison knows both sides.

it may be objected, that many who are capable of the higher pleasures, occasionally, under the influence of temptation, postpone them to the lower. but this is quite compatible with a full appreciation of the intrinsic superiority of the higher. men often, from infirmity of character, make their election for the nearer good, though they know it to be the less valuable; and this no less when the choice is between two bodily pleasures, than when it is between bodily and mental. they pursue sensual indulgences to the injury of health, though perfectly aware that health is the greater good. it may be further objected, that many who begin with youthful enthusiasm for everything noble, as they advance in years sink into indolence and selfishness. but i do not believe that those who undergo this very common change, voluntarily choose the lower description of pleasures in preference to the higher. i believe that before they devote themselves exclusively to the one, they have already become incapable of the other. capacity for the nobler feelings is in most natures a very tender plant, easily killed, not only by hostile influences, but by mere want of sustenance; and in the majority of young persons it speedily dies away if the occupations to which their position in life has devoted them, and the society into which it has thrown them, are not favourable to keeping that higher capacity in exercise. men lose their high aspirations as they lose their intellectual tastes, because they have not time or opportunity for indulging them; and they addict themselves to inferior pleasures, not because they deliberately prefer them, but because they are either the only ones to which they have access, or the only ones which they are any longer capable of enjoying. it may be questioned whether any one who has remained equally susceptible to both classes of pleasures, ever knowingly and calmly preferred the lower; though many, in all ages, have broken down in an ineffectual attempt to combine both.
but many people who are capable of the higher pleasures do sometimes, under the influence of temptation, give preference to the lower ones. yes, but this is quite compatible with their fully appreciating the intrinsic superiority of the higher. men's infirmity of character often leads them to choose the nearer good over the more valuable one; and they do this just as much when it's a choice between two bodily pleasures as when it is between a bodily pleasure and a mental one. they pursue sensual pleasures at the expense of their health, though they are perfectly aware that health is the greater good, doing this because the sensual pleasures are nearer. many people who begin with youthful enthusiasm for everything noble, as they grow old sink into laziness and selfishness. yes, this is a very common change; but i don't think that those who undergo it voluntarily choose the lower kinds of pleasures in preference to the higher. i believe that before they devote themselves exclusively to the lower pleasures they have already become incapable of the higher ones. in most people a capacity for the nobler feelings is a very tender plant that is easily killed, not only by hostile influences but by mere lack of nourishment; and in the majority of young persons it quickly dies away if their jobs and their social lives aren't favourable to keeping that higher capacity in use. men lose their high aspirations as they lose their intellectual tastes, because they don't have time or opportunity for indulging them; and they addict themselves to lower pleasures not because they deliberately prefer them but because they are either the only pleasures they can get or the only pleasures they can still enjoy. it may be questioned whether anyone who has remained equally capable of both kinds of pleasure has ever knowingly and calmly preferred the lower kind; though throughout the centuries many people have broken down in an ineffectual attempt to have both at once.

from this verdict of the only competent judges, i apprehend there can be no appeal. on a question which is the best worth having of two pleasures, or which of two modes of existence is the most grateful to the feelings, apart from its moral attributes and from its consequences, the judgment of those who are qualified by knowledge of both, or, if they differ, that of the majority among them, must be admitted as final. and there needs be the less hesitation to accept this judgment respecting the quality of pleasures, since there is no other tribunal to be referred to even on the question of quantity. what means are there of determining which is the acutest of two pains, or the intensest of two pleasurable sensations, except the general suffrage of those who are familiar with both? neither pains nor pleasures are homogeneous, and pain is always heterogeneous with pleasure. what is there to decide whether a particular pleasure is worth purchasing at the cost of a particular pain, except the feelings and judgment of the experienced? when, therefore, those feelings and judgment declare the pleasures derived from the higher faculties to be preferable in kind, apart from the question of intensity, to those of which the animal nature, disjoined from the higher faculties, is susceptible, they are entitled on this subject to the same regard.
i don't see that there can be any appeal against this verdict of the only competent judges! on a question as to which is the better worth having of two pleasures, or which of two ways of life is the more agreeable to the feelings (apart from its moral attributes and from its consequences), the judgment of those who are qualified by knowledge of both must be admitted as final or, if they differ among themselves, the judgment of the majority among them. and we can be encouraged to accept this judgment concerning the quality of pleasures by the fact that there is no other tribunal to appeal to even on the question of quantity. what means do we have for deciding which is the more acute of two pains, or the more intense of two pleasurable sensations, other than the collective opinion of those who are familiar with both? moving back now from quantity to quality: there are different kinds of pain and different kinds of pleasure, and every pain is different from every pleasure. what can decide whether a particular kind of pleasure is worth purchasing at the cost of a particular kind of pain, if not the feelings and judgment of those who are experienced in both kinds? when, therefore, those feelings and judgments declare the pleasures derived from the higher faculties to be preferable in kind, apart from the question of intensity, to those that can be enjoyed by animals that don't have the higher faculties, their opinion on this subject too should be respected.

i have dwelt on this point, as being a necessary part of a perfectly just conception of utility or happiness, considered as the directive rule of human conduct. but it is by no means an indispensable condition to the acceptance of the utilitarian standard; for that standard is not the agent's own greatest happiness, but the greatest amount of happiness altogether; and if it may possibly be doubted whether a noble character is always the happier for its nobleness, there can be no doubt that it makes other people happier, and that the world in general is immensely a gainer by it. utilitarianism, therefore, could only attain its end by the general cultivation of nobleness of character, even if each individual were only benefited by the nobleness of others, and his own, so far as happiness is concerned, were a sheer deduction from the benefit. but the bare enunciation of such an absurdity as this last, renders refutation superfluous.
i have dwelt on this point because you need to understand it if you are to have a perfectly sound conception of utility or happiness, considered as the governing rule of human conduct. but you could rationally accept the utilitarian standard without having grasped that people who enjoy the higher pleasures are happier than those who don't. that's because the utilitarian standard is not the agent's own greatest happiness but the greatest amount of happiness altogether; and even if it can be doubted whether a noble character is always happier because of its nobleness, such a character certainly makes other people happier, and the world in general gains immensely from its existence. so utilitarianism would achieve its end only through the general cultivation of nobleness of character, even if each individual got benefit only from the nobleness of others, with his own nobleness serving to reduce his own happiness. but mere statement of this last supposition brings out its absurdity so clearly that there is no need for me to argue against it.

according to the greatest happiness principle, as above explained, the ultimate end, with reference to and for the sake of which all other things are desirable (whether we are considering our own good or that of other people), is an existence exempt as far as possible from pain, and as rich as possible in enjoyments, both in point of quantity and quality; the test of quality, and the rule for measuring it against quantity, being the preference felt by those who, in their opportunities of experience, to which must be added their habits of self-consciousness and self-observation, are best furnished with the means of comparison. this, being, according to the utilitarian opinion, the end of human action, is necessarily also the standard of morality; which may accordingly be defined, the rules and precepts for human conduct, by the observance of which an existence such as has been described might be, to the greatest extent possible, secured to all mankind; and not to them only, but, so far as the nature of things admits, to the whole sentient creation.
happiness as an aim according to the greatest happiness principle as i have explained it, the ultimate end , for the sake of which all other things are desirable (whether we are considering our own good or that of other people) is an existence as free as possible from pain and as rich as possible in enjoyments. this means rich in quantity and in quality; the test of quality, and the rule for measuring it against quantity, being the preferences of those who are best equipped to make the comparison equipped, that is, by the range of their experience and by their habits of self-consciousness and self-observation. if the greatest happiness of all is (as the utilitarian opinion says it is) the end of human action, is must also be the standard of morality; which can therefore be defined as: the rules and precepts for human conduct such that: the observance of them would provide the best possible guarantee of an existence such as has been described for all mankind and, so far as the nature of things allows, for the whole sentient creation.

against this doctrine, however, arises another class of objectors, who say that happiness, in any form, cannot be the rational purpose of human life and action; because, in the first place, it is unattainable: and they contemptuously ask, what right hast thou to be happy? a question which mr. carlyle clenches by the addition, what right, a short time ago, hadst thou even to be? next, they say, that men can do without happiness; that all noble human beings have felt this, and could not have become noble but by learning the lesson of entsagen, or renunciation; which lesson, thoroughly learnt and submitted to, they affirm to be the beginning and necessary condition of all virtue.
against this doctrine, however, another class of objectors rise up, saying that the rational purpose of human life and action cannot be happiness in any form. for one thing, it is unattainable, they say; and they contemptuously ask what right do you have to be happy?, a question that mr. carlyle drives home by adding what right, a short time ago, did you have even to exist?. they also say that men can do without happiness; that all noble human beings have felt this, and couldn't have become noble except by learning the lesson of  renunciation. they say that thoroughly learning and submitting to that lesson is the beginning and necessary condition of all virtue.

the first of these objections would go to the root of the matter were it well founded; for if no happiness is to be had at all by human beings, the attainment of it cannot be the end of morality, or of any rational conduct. though, even in that case, something might still be said for the utilitarian theory; since utility includes not solely the pursuit of happiness, but the prevention or mitigation of unhappiness; and if the former aim be chimerical, there will be all the greater scope and more imperative need for the latter, so long at least as mankind think fit to live, and do not take refuge in the simultaneous act of suicide recommended under certain conditions by novalis. when, however, it is thus positively asserted to be impossible that human life should be happy, the assertion, if not something like a verbal quibble, is at least an exaggeration. if by happiness be meant a continuity of highly pleasurable excitement, it is evident enough that this is impossible. a state of exalted pleasure lasts only moments, or in some cases, and with some intermissions, hours or days, and is the occasional brilliant flash of enjoyment, not its permanent and steady flame. of this the philosophers who have taught that happiness is the end of life were as fully aware as those who taunt them. the happiness which they meant was not a life of rapture, but moments of such, in an existence made up of few and transitory pains, many and various pleasures, with a decided predominance of the active over the passive, and having as the foundation of the whole, not to expect more from life than it is capable of bestowing. a life thus composed, to those who have been fortunate enough to obtain it, has always appeared worthy of the name of happiness. and such an existence is even now the lot of many, during some considerable portion of their lives. the present wretched education, and wretched social arrangements, are the only real hindrance to its being attainable by almost all.
if the first of these objections were right, it would go to the root of the matter; for if human beings can't have any happiness, the achieving of happiness can't be the end of morality or of any rational conduct. still, even if human beings couldn't be happy there might still be something to be said for the utilitarian theory, because utility includes not solely the pursuit of happiness but also the prevention or lessening of unhappiness; and if the former aim is illusory there will be all the more scope for and need of the latter. at any rate, that will be true so long as mankind choose to go on living, and don't take refuge in the simultaneous act of suicide recommended under certain conditions by the german poet novalis. but when someone positively asserts that it is impossible for human life to be happy, if this isn't something like a verbal quibble it is at least an exaggeration. if happiness is taken to mean a continuous state of highly pleasurable excitement, it is obvious enough that this is impossible. a state of exalted pleasure lasts only moments, or in some cases and with some interruptions hours or days. such an experience is the occasional brilliant flash of enjoyment, not its permanent and steady flame. the philosophers who have taught that happiness is the end of life were as fully aware of this as those who taunt them. the happiness that they meant was not a life of rapture; but a life containing some moments of rapture, a few brief pains, and many and various pleasures; a life that is much more active than passive; a life based on not expecting more from life than it is capable of providing. a life made up of those components has always appeared worthy of the name of happiness to those who have been fortunate enough to obtain it. and even now many people have such an existence during a considerable part of their lives. the present wretched education and wretched social arrangements are the only real hindrance to its being attainable by almost everyone.

the objectors perhaps may doubt whether human beings, if taught to consider happiness as the end of life, would be satisfied with such a moderate share of it. but great numbers of mankind have been satisfied with much less. the main constituents of a satisfied life appear to be two, either of which by itself is often found sufficient for the purpose: tranquillity, and excitement. with much tranquillity, many find that they can be content with very little pleasure: with much excitement, many can reconcile themselves to a considerable quantity of pain. there is assuredly no inherent impossibility in enabling even the mass of mankind to unite both; since the two are so far from being incompatible that they are in natural alliance, the prolongation of either being a preparation for, and exciting a wish for, the other. it is only those in whom indolence amounts to a vice, that do not desire excitement after an interval of repose; it is only those in whom the need of excitement is a disease, that feel the tranquillity which follows excitement dull and insipid, instead of pleasurable in direct proportion to the excitement which preceded it. when people who are tolerably fortunate in their outward lot do not find in life sufficient enjoyment to make it valuable to them, the cause generally is, caring for nobody but themselves. to those who have neither public nor private affections, the excitements of life are much curtailed, and in any case dwindle in value as the time approaches when all selfish interests must be terminated by death: while those who leave after them objects of personal affection, and especially those who have also cultivated a fellow-feeling with the collective interests of mankind, retain as lively an interest in life on the eve of death as in the vigour of youth and health. next to selfishness, the principal cause which makes life unsatisfactory, is want of mental cultivation. a cultivated mind i do not mean that of a philosopher, but any mind to which the fountains of knowledge have been opened, and which has been taught, in any tolerable degree, to exercise its faculties finds sources of inexhaustible interest in all that surrounds it; in the objects of nature, the achievements of art, the imaginations of poetry, the incidents of history, the ways of mankind past and present, and their prospects in the future. it is possible, indeed, to become indifferent to all this, and that too without having exhausted a thousandth part of it; but only when one has had from the beginning no moral or human interest in these things, and has sought in them only the gratification of curiosity.
if human beings are taught to consider happiness as the end of life, they aren't likely to be satisfied with such a moderate share of it. on the contrary, very many people have been satisfied with much less! there seem to be two main constituents of a satisfied life, and each of them has often been found to be, on its own, sufficient for the purpose. they are tranquillity and excitement. many people find that when they have much tranquillity they can be content with very little pleasure; and many find that when they have much excitement they can put up with a considerable quantity of pain. it is certainly possible that a man and even the mass of mankind should have both tranquillity and excitement. so far from being incompatible with one another, they are natural allies: prolonging either of them is a preparation for the other, and creates a wish for it. the only people who don't desire excitement after a restful period are those in whom laziness amounts to a vice; and the only ones who dislike the tranquillity that follows excitement finding it dull and bland rather than pleasurable in proportion to the excitement that preceded it are those whose need for excitement is a disease. when people who are fairly fortunate in their material circumstances don't find sufficient enjoyment to make life valuable to them, this is usually because they care for nobody but themselves. if someone has neither public nor private affections, that will greatly reduce the amount of excitement his life can contain, and any excitements that he does have will sink in value as the time approaches when all selfish interests must be cut off by death. on the other hand, someone who leaves after him objects of personal affection, especially if he has developed a fellow-feeling with the interests of mankind as a whole, will retain as lively an interest in life on the eve of his death as he had in the vigour of youth and health. next to selfishness, the principal cause that makes life unsatisfactory is lack of mental cultivation. i am talking here not about minds that are cultivated as a philosopher's is, but simply minds that have been open to the fountains of knowledge and have been given a reasonable amount of help in using their faculties. a mind that is cultivated in that sense will find inexhaustible sources of interest in everything that surrounds it in the objects of nature, the achievements of art, the imaginations of poetry, the incidents of history, human events in the past and present as well as their prospects in the future. it is possible to become indifferent to all this, even when one hasn't yet exhausted a thousandth part of it; but that can happen only to someone who from the beginning has had no moral or human interest in these things, and has looked to them only to satisfy his curiosity.

now there is absolutely no reason in the nature of things why an amount of mental culture sufficient to give an intelligent interest in these objects of contemplation, should not be the inheritance of every one born in a civilized country. as little is there an inherent necessity that any human being should be a selfish egotist, devoid of every feeling or care but those which centre in his own miserable individuality. something far superior to this is sufficiently common even now, to give ample earnest of what the human species may be made. genuine private affections, and a sincere interest in the public good, are possible, though in unequal degrees, to every rightly brought-up human being. in a world in which there is so much to interest, so much to enjoy, and so much also to correct and improve, every one who has this moderate amount of moral and intellectual requisites is capable of an existence which may be called enviable; and unless such a person, through bad laws, or subjection to the will of others, is denied the liberty to use the sources of happiness within his reach, he will not fail to find this enviable existence, if he escape the positive evils of life, the great sources of physical and mental suffering such as indigence, disease, and the unkindness, worthlessness, or premature loss of objects of affection. the main stress of the problem lies, therefore, in the contest with these calamities, from which it is a rare good fortune entirely to escape; which, as things now are, cannot be obviated, and often cannot be in any material degree mitigated. yet no one whose opinion deserves a moment's consideration can doubt that most of the great positive evils of the world are in themselves removable, and will, if human affairs continue to improve, be in the end reduced within narrow limits. poverty, in any sense implying suffering, may be completely extinguished by the wisdom of society, combined with the good sense and providence of individuals. even that most intractable of enemies, disease, may be indefinitely reduced in dimensions by good physical and moral education, and proper control of noxious influences; while the progress of science holds out a promise for the future of still more direct conquests over this detestable foe. and every advance in that direction relieves us from some, not only of the chances which cut short our own lives, but, what concerns us still more, which deprive us of those in whom our happiness is wrapt up. as for vicissitudes of fortune, and other disappointments connected with worldly circumstances, these are principally the effect either of gross imprudence, of ill-regulated desires, or of bad or imperfect social institutions. all the grand sources, in short, of human suffering are in a great degree, many of them almost entirely, conquerable by human care and effort; and though their removal is grievously slow though a long succession of generations will perish in the breach before the conquest is completed, and this world becomes all that, if will and knowledge were not wanting, it might easily be made yet every mind sufficiently intelligent and generous to bear a part, however small and unconspicuous, in the endeavour, will draw a noble enjoyment from the contest itself, which he would not for any bribe in the form of selfish indulgence consent to be without.
these two prime requirements of happiness mental cultivation and unselfishness shouldn't be thought of as possible only for a lucky few. there is absolutely no reason in the nature of things why an amount of mental culture sufficient to give an intelligent interest in science, poetry, art, history etc. should not be the inheritance of everyone born in a civilised country; any more than there's any inherent necessity that any human being should be a selfish egotist whose only feelings and cares are ones that centre on his own miserable individuality. something far superior to this is, even now, common enough to give plenty of indication of what the human species may become. genuine private affections and a sincere interest in the public good are possible, though to different extents, for every rightly brought up human being. in a world containing so much to interest us, so much for us to enjoy, and so much needing to be corrected and improved, everyone who has a moderate amount of these moral and intellectual requirements unselfishness and cultivation is capable of an existence that may be called enviable; and such a person will certainly have this enviable existence as long as he isn't, because of bad laws or conditions of servitude, prevented from using the sources of happiness that are within his reach; and he escapes the positive evils of life the great sources of physical and mental suffering such as poverty, disease, and bad luck with friends and lovers (turning against him, proving to be worthless, or dying young). so the main thrust of the problem lies in the battle against these calamities. in the present state of things, poverty and disease etc. can't be eliminated, and often can't even be lessened much; and it is a rare good fortune to escape such troubles entirely. yet no-one whose opinion deserves a moment's consideration can doubt that most of the great positive evils of the world are in themselves removable, and will (if human affairs continue to improve) eventually be reduced to something quite small. poverty, in any sense implying suffering, could be completely extinguished by the wisdom of society combined with the good sense and generosity of individuals. even that most stubborn of enemies, disease, could be indefinitely reduced in scope by good physical and moral education and proper control of noxious influences; while the progress of science holds out a promise of still more direct conquests over this detestable foe. and every advance in that direction reduces the probability of events that would cut short our own lives or more important to us the lives of others in whom our happiness is wrapped up. as for ups and downs of fortune, and other disappointments connected with worldly circumstances, these are principally the effect of gross foolishness, of desires that got out of control, or of bad or imperfect social institutions. in short, all the large sources of human suffering are to a large extent and many of them almost entirely conquerable by human care and effort. their removal is grievously slow, and a long succession of generations will perish in the battle before the conquest is completed and this world becomes what it easily could be if we had the will and the knowledge to make it so. yet despite this, every mind that is sufficiently intelligent and generous to play some part (however small and inconspicuous) in the effort will draw a noble enjoyment from the contest itself an enjoyment that he couldn't be induced to give up by any bribe in the form of selfish indulgence.

and this leads to the true estimation of what is said by the objectors concerning the possibility, and the obligation, of learning to do without happiness. unquestionably it is possible to do without happiness; it is done involuntarily by nineteen-twentieths of mankind, even in those parts of our present world which are least deep in barbarism; and it often has to be done voluntarily by the hero or the martyr, for the sake of something which he prizes more than his individual happiness. but this something, what is it, unless the happiness of others, or some of the requisites of happiness? it is noble to be capable of resigning entirely one's own portion of happiness, or chances of it: but, after all, this self-sacrifice must be for some end; it is not its own end; and if we are told that its end is not happiness, but virtue, which is better than happiness, i ask, would the sacrifice be made if the hero or martyr did not believe that it would earn for others immunity from similar sacrifices? would it be made, if he thought that his renunciation of happiness for himself would produce no fruit for any of his fellow creatures, but to make their lot like his, and place them also in the condition of persons who have renounced happiness? all honour to those who can abnegate for themselves the personal enjoyment of life, when by such renunciation they contribute worthily to increase the amount of happiness in the world; but he who does it, or professes to do it, for any other purpose, is no more deserving of admiration than the ascetic mounted on his pillar. he may be an inspiriting proof of what men can do, but assuredly not an example of what they should.
and this leads to the right response to the objectors who say that we can, and that we should, do without happiness. it is certainly possible to do without happiness; nineteen-twentieths of mankind are compelled to do without it, even in those parts of our present world that are least deep in barbarism. and it often happens that a hero or martyr forgoes it for the sake of something that he values more than his individual happiness. but what is this something if it isn't the happiness of others or something required for their happiness? it is noble to be capable of resigning entirely one's own share of happiness, or the chances of it; but no-one engages in self-sacrifice just so as to engage in self-sacrifice! he must have some end or purpose. you may say: the end he aims at in his self-sacrifice is not anyone's happiness; it is virtue, which is better than happiness. in response to this i ask: would the sacrifice be made if the hero or martyr didn't think it would spare others from having to make similar sacrifices? would it be made if he thought that his renunciation of happiness for himself would produce no result for any of his fellow creatures except to make their situation like his, putting them in also in the position of persons who have renounced happiness? all honour to those who can give up for themselves the personal enjoyment of life, when by doing this they contribute worthily to increasing the amount of happiness in the world; but someone who does it, or claims to do it, for any other purpose doesn't deserve admiration any more than does the ascetic living on top of his pillar. he may be a rousing proof of what men can do, but surely not an example of what they should do. self-sacrifice

though it is only in a very imperfect state of the world's arrangements that any one can best serve the happiness of others by the absolute sacrifice of his own, yet so long as the world is in that imperfect state, i fully acknowledge that the readiness to make such a sacrifice is the highest virtue which can be found in man. i will add, that in this condition of the world, paradoxical as the assertion may be, the conscious ability to do without happiness gives the best prospect of realizing such happiness as is attainable. for nothing except that consciousness can raise a person above the chances of life, by making him feel that, let fate and fortune do their worst, they have not power to subdue him: which, once felt, frees him from excess of anxiety concerning the evils of life, and enables him, like many a stoic in the worst times of the roman empire, to cultivate in tranquillity the sources of satisfaction accessible to him, without concerning himself about the uncertainty of their duration, any more than about their inevitable end.
only while the world is in a very imperfect state can it happen that anyone's best chance of serving the happiness of others is through the absolute sacrifice of his own happiness; but while the world is in that imperfect state, i fully admit that the readiness to make such a sacrifice is the highest virtue that can be found in man. i would add something that may seem paradoxical: namely that in this present imperfect condition of the world the conscious ability to do without happiness gives the best prospect of bringing about such happiness as is attainable. for nothing except that consciousness can raise a person above the chances of life by making him feel that fate and fortune let them do their worst! have no power to subdue him. once he feels that, it frees him from excessive anxiety about the evils of life and lets him (like many a stoic in the worst times of the roman empire) calmly develop the sources of satisfaction that are available to him, not concerning himself with the uncertainty regarding how long they will last or the certainty that they will end.

meanwhile, let utilitarians never cease to claim the morality of self-devotion as a possession which belongs by as good a right to them, as either to the stoic or to the transcendentalist. the utilitarian morality does recognise in human beings the power of sacrificing their own greatest good for the good of others. it only refuses to admit that the sacrifice is itself a good. a sacrifice which does not increase, or tend to increase, the sum total of happiness, it considers as wasted. the only self-renunciation which it applauds, is devotion to the happiness, or to some of the means of happiness, of others; either of mankind collectively, or of individuals within the limits imposed by the collective interests of mankind.
meanwhile, let utilitarians never cease to claim that they have as much right as the stoic or the transcendentalist to maintain the morality of devotion to a cause as something that belongs to them. the utilitarian morality does recognise that human beings can sacrifice their own greatest good for the good of others; it merely refuses to admit that the sacrifice is itself a good. it regards as wasted any sacrifice that doesn't increase, or tend to increase, the sum total of happiness. the only self-renunciation that it applauds is devotion to the happiness, or to some of the means to happiness, of others.

i must again repeat, what the assailants of utilitarianism seldom have the justice to acknowledge, that the happiness which forms the utilitarian standard of what is right in conduct, is not the agent's own happiness, but that of all concerned. as between his own happiness and that of others, utilitarianism requires him to be as strictly impartial as a disinterested and benevolent spectator. in the golden rule of jesus of nazareth, we read the complete spirit of the ethics of utility. to do as one would be done by, and to love one's neighbour as oneself, constitute the ideal perfection of utilitarian morality. as the means of making the nearest approach to this ideal, utility would enjoin, first, that laws and social arrangements should place the happiness, or (as speaking practically it may be called) the interest, of every individual, as nearly as possible in harmony with the interest of the whole; and secondly, that education and opinion, which have so vast a power over human character, should so use that power as to establish in the mind of every individual an indissoluble association between his own happiness and the good of the whole; especially between his own happiness and the practice of such modes of conduct, negative and positive, as regard for the universal happiness prescribes: so that not only he may be unable to conceive the possibility of happiness to himself, consistently with conduct opposed to the general good, but also that a direct impulse to promote the general good may be in every individual one of the habitual motives of action, and the sentiments connected therewith may fill a large and prominent place in every human being's sentient existence. if the impugners of the utilitarian morality represented it to their own minds in this its true character, i know not what recommendation possessed by any other morality they could possibly affirm to be wanting to it: what more beautiful or more exalted developments of human nature any other ethical system can be supposed to foster, or what springs of action, not accessible to the utilitarian, such systems rely on for giving effect to their mandates.
i must again repeat something that the opponents of utilitarianism are seldom fair enough to admit, namely that the happiness that forms the utilitarian standard of what is right in conduct is not the agent's own happiness but that of all concerned. as between his own happiness and that of others, utilitarianism requires him to be as strictly impartial as a disinterested and benevolent spectator. in the golden rule of jesus of nazareth we read the complete spirit of the ethics of utility. to do as you would be done by, and to love your neighbour as yourself constitute the ideal perfection of utilitarian morality. as the practical way to get as close as possible to this ideal, the ethics of utility would command two things. (1) first, laws and social arrangements should place the happiness (or what for practical purposes we may call the interest) of every individual as much as possible in harmony with the interest of the whole. (2) education and opinion, which have such a vast power over human character, should use that power to establish in the mind of every individual an unbreakable link between his own happiness and the good of the whole; especially between his own happiness and the kinds of conduct (whether doing or allowing) that are conducive to universal happiness. if (2) is done properly, it will tend to have two results: (2a) the individual won't be able to conceive the possibility of being personally happy while acting in ways opposed to the general good. (2b) in each individual a direct impulse to promote the general good will be one of the habitual motives of action, and the feelings connected with it will fill a large and prominent place in his sentient existence. this is the true character of the utilitarian morality. if those who attack utilitarianism see it as being like this, i don't know what good features of some other moralities they could possibly say that utilitarianism lacks, what more beautiful or more elevated developments of human nature any other ethical systems can be supposed to encourage, or what motivations for action that aren't available to the utilitarian those other systems rely on for giving effect to their mandates.

the objectors to utilitarianism cannot always be charged with representing it in a discreditable light. on the contrary, those among them who entertain anything like a just idea of its disinterested character, sometimes find fault with its standard as being too high for humanity. they say it is exacting too much to require that people shall always act from the inducement of promoting the general interests of society. but this is to mistake the very meaning of a standard of morals, and to confound the rule of action with the motive of it. it is the business of ethics to tell us what are our duties, or by what test we may know them; but no system of ethics requires that the sole motive of all we do shall be a feeling of duty; on the contrary, ninety-nine hundredths of all our actions are done from other motives, and rightly so done, if the rule of duty does not condemn them. it is the more unjust to utilitarianism that this particular misapprehension should be made a ground of objection to it, inasmuch as utilitarian moralists have gone beyond almost all others in affirming that the motive has nothing to do with the morality of the action, though much with the worth of the agent. he who saves a fellow creature from drowning does what is morally right, whether his motive be duty, or the hope of being paid for his trouble: he who betrays the friend that trusts him, is guilty of a crime, even if his object be to serve another friend to whom he is under greater obligations. but to speak only of actions done from the motive of duty, and in direct obedience to principle: it is a misapprehension of the utilitarian mode of thought, to conceive it as implying that people should fix their minds upon so wide a generality as the world, or society at large. the great majority of good actions are intended, not for the benefit of the world, but for that of individuals, of which the good of the world is made up; and the thoughts of the most virtuous man need not on these occasions travel beyond the particular persons concerned, except so far as is necessary to assure himself that in benefiting them he is not violating the rights that is, the legitimate and authorized expectations of any one else. the multiplication of happiness is, according to the utilitarian ethics, the object of virtue: the occasions on which any person (except one in a thousand) has it in his power to do this on an extended scale, in other words, to be a public benefactor, are but exceptional; and on these occasions alone is he called on to consider public utility; in every other case, private utility, the interest or happiness of some few persons, is all he has to attend to. those alone the influence of whose actions extends to society in general, need concern themselves habitually about so large an object. in the case of abstinences indeed of things which people forbear to do, from moral considerations, though the consequences in the particular case might be beneficial it would be unworthy of an intelligent agent not to be consciously aware that the action is of a class which, if practised generally, would be generally injurious, and that this is the ground of the obligation to abstain from it. the amount of regard for the public interest implied in this recognition, is no greater than is demanded by every system of morals; for they all enjoin to abstain from whatever is manifestly pernicious to society.
the objectors to utilitarianism can't be accused of always representing it in a discreditable light. on the contrary, objectors who have anything like a correct idea of its disinterested character sometimes find fault with utilitarianism's standard as being too high for humanity. to require people always to act from the motive of promoting the general interests of society that is demanding too much, they say. but this is to mistake the very meaning of a standard of morals, and confuse the rule of action with the motive for acting. it is the business of ethics to tell us what are our duties, or by what test we can know them; but no system of ethics requires that our only motive in everything we do shall be a feeling of duty; on the contrary, ninety-nine hundredths of all our actions are done from other motives, and rightly so if the rule of duty doesn't condemn them. it is especially unfair to utilitarianism to object to it on the basis of this particular misunderstanding, because utilitarian moralists have gone beyond almost everyone in asserting that the motive has nothing to do with the morality of the action though it has much to do with the worth of the agent. he who saves a fellow creature from drowning does what is morally right, whether his motive is duty or the hope of being paid for his trouble; he who betrays a friend who trusts him is guilty of a crime, even if his aim is to serve another friend to whom he is under greater obligations. let us now look at actions that are done from the motive of duty, in direct obedience to the utilitarian principle: it is a misunderstanding of the utilitarian way of thinking to conceive it as implying that people should fix their minds on anything as wide as the world or society in general. the great majority of good actions are intended not for the benefit of the world but for parts of the good of the world, namely the benefit of individuals. and on these occasions the thoughts of the most virtuous man need not go beyond the particular persons concerned, except to the extent that he has to assure himself that in benefiting those individuals he isn't violating the rights (i.e. the legitimate and authorised expectations) of anyone else. according to the utilitarian ethics the object of virtue is to multiply happiness; for any person (except one in a thousand) it is only on exceptional occasions that he has it in his power to do this on an extended scale, i.e. to be a public benefactor; and it is only on these occasions that he is called upon to consider public utility; in every other case he needs to attend only to private utility, the interest or happiness of some few persons. the only people who need to concern themselves regularly about so large an object as society in general are those few whose actions have an influence that extends that far. thoughts about the general welfare do have a place in everyone's moral thinking in the case of refrainings things that people hold off from doing, for moral reasons, though the consequences in the particular case might be beneficial. the thought in these cases is like this: if i acted in that way, my action would belong to a class of actions which, if practised generally, would be generally harmful, and for that reason i ought not to perform it. it would be unworthy of an intelligent agent not to be consciously aware of such considerations. but the amount of regard for the public interest implied in this kind of thought is no greater than is demanded by every system of morals, for they all demand that one refrain from anything that would obviously be pernicious to society; so there is no basis here for a criticism of utilitarianism in particular.

the same considerations dispose of another reproach against the doctrine of utility, founded on a still grosser misconception of the purpose of a standard of morality, and of the very meaning of the words right and wrong. it is often affirmed that utilitarianism renders men cold and unsympathizing; that it chills their moral feelings towards individuals; that it makes them regard only the dry and hard consideration of the consequences of actions, not taking into their moral estimate the qualities from which those actions emanate. if the assertion means that they do not allow their judgment respecting the rightness or wrongness of an action to be influenced by their opinion of the qualities of the person who does it, this is a complaint not against utilitarianism, but against having any standard of morality at all; for certainly no known ethical standard decides an action to be good or bad because it is done by a good or a bad man, still less because done by an amiable, a brave, or a benevolent man or the contrary. these considerations are relevant, not to the estimation of actions, but of persons; and there is nothing in the utilitarian theory inconsistent with the fact that there are other things which interest us in persons besides the rightness and wrongness of their actions. the stoics, indeed, with the paradoxical misuse of language which was part of their system, and by which they strove to raise themselves above all concern about anything but virtue, were fond of saying that he who has that has everything; that he, and only he, is rich, is beautiful, is a king. but no claim of this description is made for the virtuous man by the utilitarian doctrine. utilitarians are quite aware that there are other desirable possessions and qualities besides virtue, and are perfectly willing to allow to all of them their full worth. they are also aware that a right action does not necessarily indicate a virtuous character, and that actions which are blameable often proceed from qualities entitled to praise. when this is apparent in any particular case, it modifies their estimation, not certainly of the act, but of the agent. i grant that they are, notwithstanding, of opinion, that in the long run the best proof of a good character is good actions; and resolutely refuse to consider any mental disposition as good, of which the predominant tendency is to produce bad conduct. this makes them unpopular with many people; but it is an unpopularity which they must share with every one who regards the distinction between right and wrong in a serious light; and the reproach is not one which a conscientious utilitarian need be anxious to repel.
the same considerations dispose of another reproach against the doctrine of utility, based on a still grosser misunderstanding of the purpose of a standard of morality and of the very meanings of the words right and wrong. it is often said that utilitarianism makes men cold and unsympathising; that it chills their moral feelings towards individuals; that it makes them attend only to the dry and hard consideration of the consequences of actions, leaving out of their moral estimate the personal qualities from which those actions emanate. if this means that they don't allow their judgment about the rightness or wrongness of an action to be influenced by their opinion of the qualities of the person who does it, this is a complaint not against utilitarianism but against having any standard of morality at all; for certainly no known ethical standard declares that an action is good or bad because it is done by a good or a bad man, still less because it is done by a lovable, brave or benevolent man, or by an unfriendly, cowardly or unsympathetic one. these considerations of personal virtue are relevant to how we estimate persons, not actions; and the utilitarian theory in no way conflicts with the fact that there are other things that interest us in persons besides the rightness and wrongness of their actions. the stoics, indeed, with the paradoxical misuse of language which was part of their system and by which they tried to raise themselves to a level at which their only concern was with virtue, were fond of saying that he who has virtue has everything; that it is the virtuous man, and only the virtuous man, who is rich, is beautiful, is a king. but the utilitarian doctrine doesn't make any such claim on behalf of the virtuous man. utilitarians are well aware that there are other desirable possessions and qualities besides virtue, and are perfectly willing to allow to all of them their full worth. they are also aware that a right action doesn't necessarily indicate a virtuous character, and that actions that are blamable often come from personal qualities that deserve praise. when this shows up in any particular case, it modifies utilitarian's estimation not of the act but of the agent. they do hold that in the long run the best proof of a good character is good actions; and they firmly refuse to consider any mental disposition as good if its predominant tendency is to produce bad conduct. this, which i freely grant, makes utilitarians unpopular with many people; but this is an unpopularity that they must share with everyone who takes seriously the distinction between right and wrong; and the criticism is not one that a conscientious utilitarian need be anxious to fend off.

if no more be meant by the objection than that many utilitarians look on the morality of actions, as measured by the utilitarian standard, with too exclusive a regard, and do not lay sufficient stress upon the other beauties of character which go towards making a human being loveable or admirable, this may be admitted. utilitarians who have cultivated their moral feelings, but not their sympathies nor their artistic perceptions, do fall into this mistake; and so do all other moralists under the same conditions. what can be said in excuse for other moralists is equally available for them, namely, that if there is to be any error, it is better that it should be on that side. as a matter of fact, we may affirm that among utilitarians as among adherents of other systems, there is every imaginable degree of rigidity and of laxity in the application of their standard: some are even puritanically rigorous, while others are as indulgent as can possibly be desired by sinner or by sentimentalist. but on the whole, a doctrine which brings prominently forward the interest that mankind have in the repression and prevention of conduct which violates the moral law, is likely to be inferior to no other in turning the sanctions of opinion against such violations. it is true, the question, what does violate the moral law? is one on which those who recognise different standards of morality are likely now and then to differ. but difference of opinion on moral questions was not first introduced into the world by utilitarianism, while that doctrine does supply, if not always an easy, at all events a tangible and intelligible mode of deciding such differences.
if the objection means only this: many utilitarians look on the morality of actions, as measured by the utilitarian standard, in too exclusive a manner, and don't put enough emphasis on the other beauties of character that go towards making a human being lovable or admirable, this may be admitted. utilitarians who have cultivated their moral feelings but not their sympathies or their artistic perceptions do fall into this mistake; and so do all other moralists under the same conditions. what can be said in excuse of other moralists is equally available for utilitarians, namely that if one is to go wrong about this, it is better to go wrong on that side, rather than caring about lovability etc. and ignoring the morality of actions. as a matter of fact, utilitarians are in this respect like the adherents of other systems: there is every imaginable degree of rigidity and of laxity in how they apply their standard of right and wrong: some are puritanically rigorous, while others are as forgiving as any sinner or sentimentalist could wish! but on the whole, a doctrine that highlights the interest that mankind have in the repression and prevention of conduct that violates the moral law is likely to do as good a job as any other in turning the force of public opinion again such violations. it is true that the question what does violate the moral law? is one on which those who recognise different standards of morality are likely now and then to differ. but that isn't a point against utilitarianism; difference of opinion on moral questions wasn't first introduced into the world by utilitarianism! and that doctrine does supply a tangible and intelligible way if not always an easy one of deciding such differences.

it may not be superfluous to notice a few more of the common misapprehensions of utilitarian ethics, even those which are so obvious and gross that it might appear impossible for any person of candour and intelligence to fall into them: since persons, even of considerable mental endowments, often give themselves so little trouble to understand the bearings of any opinion against which they entertain a prejudice, and men are in general so little conscious of this voluntary ignorance as a defect, that the vulgarest misunderstandings of ethical doctrines are continually met with in the deliberate writings of persons of the greatest pretensions both to high principle and to philosophy. we not uncommonly hear the doctrine of utility inveighed against as a godless
utilitarianism as godless

doctrine. if it be necessary to say anything at all against so mere an assumption, we may say that the question depends upon what idea we have formed of the moral character of the deity. if it be a true belief that god desires, above all things, the happiness of his creatures, and that this was his purpose in their creation, utility is not only not a godless doctrine, but more profoundly religious than any other. if it be meant that utilitarianism does not recognise the revealed will of god as the supreme law of morals, i answer, that an utilitarian who believes in the perfect goodness and wisdom of god, necessarily believes that whatever god has thought fit to reveal on the subject of morals, must fulfil the requirements of utility in a supreme degree. but others besides utilitarians have been of opinion that the christian revelation was intended, and is fitted, to inform the hearts and minds of mankind with a spirit which should enable them to find for themselves what is right, and incline them to do it when found, rather than to tell them, except in a very general way, what it is: and that we need a doctrine of ethics, carefully followed out, to interpret to us the will of god. whether this opinion is correct or not, it is superfluous here to discuss; since whatever aid religion, either natural or revealed, can afford to ethical investigation, is as open to the utilitarian moralist as to any other. he can use it as the testimony of god to the usefulness or hurtfulness of any given course of action, by as good a right as others can use it for the indication of a transcendental law, having no connexion with usefulness or with happiness.
it may be worthwhile to comment on a few more of the common misunderstandings of utilitarian ethics, even those that are so obvious and gross that it might appear impossible for any fair and intelligent person to fall into them. it might appear impossible but unfortunately it isn't: the crudest misunderstandings of ethical doctrines are continually met with in the deliberate writings of persons with the greatest claims both to high principle and to philosophy. that is because people even very able ones often take little trouble to understand the likely influence of any opinion against which they have a prejudice, and are unaware of this deliberate ignorance as a defect. we quite often hear the doctrine of utility denounced as a godless doctrine. if this mere assumption needs to be replied to at all, we may say that the question depends on what idea we have formed of the moral character of the deity. if it is true that god desires the happiness of his creatures above all else, and that this was his purpose in creating them, then utilitarianism, far from being a godless doctrine, is the most deeply religious of them all. if the accusation is that utilitarianism doesn't recognise the revealed will of god as the supreme law of morals, i answer that a utilitarian who believes in the perfect goodness and wisdom of god has to believe that whatever god has thought fit to reveal on the subject of morals must fulfil the requirements of utility in a supreme degree. others besides utilitarians have held this: the christian revelation was intended (and is fitted) to bring into the hearts and minds of mankind a spirit that will enable them to find for themselves what is right, and incline them to do right when they have found it; rather than to tell them except in a very general way what it is. and we need a doctrine of ethics, carefully followed out, to know what the will of god is. we needn't discuss here whether this is right; because whatever aid religion either natural or revealed can provide to ethical investigation is as open to the utilitarian moralist as to any other. he is as entitled to cite it as god's testimony to the usefulness or hurtfulness of a course of action as others are to cite it as pointing to a transcendental law that has no connection with usefulness or happiness. expediency

again, utility is often summarily stigmatized as an immoral doctrine by giving it the name of expediency, and taking advantage of the popular use of that term to contrast it with principle. but the expedient, in the sense in which it is opposed to the right, generally means that which is expedient for the particular interest of the agent himself: as when a minister sacrifices the interest of his country to keep himself in place. when it means anything better than this, it means that which is expedient for some immediate object, some temporary purpose, but which violates a rule whose observance is expedient in a much higher degree. the expedient, in this sense, instead of being the same thing with the useful, is a branch of the hurtful. thus, it would often be expedient, for the purpose of getting over some momentary embarrassment, or attaining some object immediately useful to ourselves or others, to tell a lie. but inasmuch as the cultivation in ourselves of a sensitive feeling on the subject of veracity, is one of the most useful, and the enfeeblement of that feeling one of the most hurtful, things to which our conduct can be instrumental; and inasmuch as any, even unintentional, deviation from truth, does that much towards weakening the trustworthiness of human assertion, which is not only the principal support of all present social well-being, but the insufficiency of which does more than any one thing that can be named to keep back civilisation, virtue, everything on which human happiness on the largest scale depends; we feel that the violation, for a present advantage, of a rule of such transcendent expediency, is not expedient, and that he who, for the sake of a convenience to himself or to some other individual, does what depends on him to deprive mankind of the good, and inflict upon them the evil, involved in the greater or less reliance which they can place in each other's word, acts the part of one of their worst enemies. yet that even this rule, sacred as it is, admits of possible exceptions, is acknowledged by all moralists; the chief of which is when the withholding of some fact (as of information from a male-factor, or of bad news from a person dangerously ill) would preserve some one (especially a person other than oneself) from great and unmerited evil, and when the withholding can only be effected by denial. but in order that the exception may not extend itself beyond the need, and may have the least possible effect in weakening reliance on veracity, it ought to be recognized, and, if possible, its limits defined; and if the principle of utility is good for anything, it must be good for weighing these conflicting utilities against one another, and marking out the region within which one or the other preponderates.
again, utilitarianism is often slapped down as an immoral doctrine by giving it the name expediency, and taking advantage of the common use of that term to contrast it with principle. but when expedient is opposed to right, it usually means what is expedient for the particular interest of the agent himself, as when a high official sacrifices the interests of his country in order to keep himself in place. when it means anything better than this, it means what is expedient for some immediate temporary purpose, while violating a rule whose observance is much more expedient. the expedient in this sense, instead of being the same thing as the useful, is a branch of the hurtful. for example, telling a lie would often be expedient for escaping some temporary difficulty or getting something that would be immediately useful to ourselves or others. but (1) the principal support of all present social well-being is people's ability to trust one another's assertions, and the lack of that trust does more than anything else to keep back civilisation, virtue, everything on which human happiness on the largest scale depends. therefore (2) the development in ourselves of a sensitive feeling about truthfulness is one of the most useful things that our conduct can encourage, and the weakening of that feeling is one of the most harmful. finally, (3) any deviation from truth even an unintentional one does something towards weakening the trustworthiness of human assertion. for these reasons we feel that (4) to obtain an immediate advantage by violating such an overwhelmingly expedient rule is not expedient, and that someone who acts in that way does his bit towards depriving mankind of the good, and inflicting on them the harm, involved in the greater or less reliance that they can place in each other's word, thus acting as though he were one of mankind's worst enemies. yet all moralists agree that even this rule about telling the truth, sacred as it is, admits of possible exceptions. the chief one is the case where the withholding of some fact from someone would save an individual (especially someone other than oneself) from great and undeserved harm, and the only way of withholding it is to lie about it. (examples: keeping information about the whereabouts of a weapon from a malefactor, keeping bad news from a person who is dangerously ill.) but in order that this exception to the truth-telling rule doesn't extend itself beyond the need for it, and has the least possible effect of weakening reliance on truth-telling, it ought to be recognised, and if possible its limits should be defined; and if the principle of utility is good for anything, it must be good for weighing these conflicting utilities against one another, and marking out the region within which one or the other dominates.

again, defenders of utility often find themselves called upon to reply to such objections as this that there is not time, previous to action, for calculating and weighing the effects of any line of conduct on the general happiness. this is exactly as if any one were to say that it is impossible to guide our conduct by christianity, because there is not time, on every occasion on which anything has to be done, to read through the old and new testaments. the answer to the objection is, that there has been ample time, namely, the whole past duration of the human species. during all that time mankind have been learning by experience the tendencies of actions; on which experience all the prudence, as well as all the morality of life, is dependent. people talk as if the commencement of this course of experience had hitherto been put off, and as if, at the moment when some man feels tempted to meddle with the property or life of another, he had to begin considering for the first time whether murder and theft are injurious to human happiness. even then i do not think that he would find the question very puzzling; but, at all events, the matter is now done to his hand. it is truly a whimsical supposition, that if mankind were agreed in considering utility to be the test of morality, they would remain without any agreement as to what is useful, and would take no measures for having their notions on the subject taught to the young, and enforced by law and opinion. there is no difficulty in proving any ethical standard whatever to work ill, if we suppose universal idiocy to be conjoined with it, but on any hypothesis short of that, mankind must by this time have acquired positive beliefs as to the effects of some actions on their happiness; and the beliefs which have thus come down are the rules of morality for the multitude, and for the philosopher until he has succeeded in finding better. that philosophers might easily do this, even now, on many subjects; that the received code of ethics is by no means of divine right; and that mankind have still much to learn as to the effects of actions on the general happiness, i admit, or rather, earnestly maintain. the corollaries from the principle of utility, like the precepts of every practical art, admit of indefinite improvement, and, in a progressive state of the human mind, their improvement is perpetually going on. but to consider the rules of morality as improvable, is one thing; to pass over the intermediate generalizations entirely, and endeavour to test each individual action directly by the first principle, is another. it is a strange notion that the acknowledgment of a first principle is inconsistent with the admission of secondary ones. to inform a traveller respecting the place of his ultimate destination, is not to forbid the use of landmarks and direction-posts on the way. the proposition that happiness is the end and aim of morality, does not mean that no road ought to be laid down to that goal, or that persons going thither should not be advised to take one direction rather than another. men really ought to leave off talking a kind of nonsense on this subject, which they would neither talk nor listen to on other matters of practical concernment. nobody argues that the art of navigation is not founded on astronomy, because sailors cannot wait to calculate the nautical almanack. being rational creatures, they go to sea with it ready calculated; and all rational creatures go out upon the sea of life with their minds made up on the common questions of right and wrong, as well as on many of the far more difficult questions of wise and foolish. and this, as long as foresight is a human quality, it is to be presumed they will continue to do. whatever we adopt as the fundamental principle of morality, we require subordinate principles to apply it by: the impossibility of doing without them, being common to all systems, can afford no argument against any one in particular: but gravely to argue as if no such secondary principles could be had, and as if mankind had remained till now, and always must remain, without drawing any general conclusions from the experience of human life, is as high a pitch, i think, as absurdity has ever reached in philosophical controversy.
again, defenders of utility often find themselves challenged to reply to such objections as this: before acting, one doesn't have time to calculate and weigh the effects on the general happiness of any line of conduct. this is just like saying: before acting, one doesn't have time on each occasion to read through the old and new testaments; so it is impossible for us to guide our conduct by christianity. the answer to the objection is that there has been plenty of time, namely, the whole past duration of the human species. during all that time, mankind have been learning by experience what sorts of consequences actions are apt to have, this being something on which all the morality of life depends, as well as all the prudence. the objectors talk as if the start of this course of experience had been put off until now, so that when some man feels tempted to meddle with the property or life of someone else he has to start at that moment considering for the first time whether murder and theft are harmful to human happiness! even if that were how things stand, i don't think he would find the question very puzzling. if mankind were agreed in considering utility to be the test of morality, they would of course it would be merely fanciful to deny it reach some agreement about what is useful, and would arrange for their notions about this to be taught to the young and enforced by law and opinion. any ethical standard whatever can easily be shown to work badly if we suppose universal idiocy to be conjoined with it! but on any hypothesis short of that, mankind must by this time have acquired positive beliefs as to the effects of some actions on their happiness; and the beliefs that have thus come down to us from the experience of mankind are the rules of morality for the people in general and for the philosopher until he succeeds in finding something better. i admit, or rather i strongly assert, that philosophers might easily find something better, even now, on many subjects; that the accepted code of ethics is not god-given; and that mankind have still much to learn about how various kinds of action affect the general happiness. the corollaries from the principle of utility, like the rules of every practical art, can be improved indefinitely, and while the human mind is progressing they are constantly improving. but to consider the intermediate rules of morality as unprovable is one thing; to pass over them entirely, trying to test each individual action directly by the first principle, is another. it is a strange notion that having a first principle is inconsistent with having secondary ones as well. when you tell a traveller the location of the place he wants to get to, you aren't forbidding him to use landmarks and direction-posts along the way! the proposition that happiness is the end and aim of morality doesn't mean that no road ought to be laid down to that goal, or that people going to it shouldn't be advised to take one direction rather than another. men really ought to stop talking a kind of nonsense on this subject -nonsense that they wouldn't utter or listen to with regard to any other practically important matter. nobody argues that the art of navigation is not based on astronomy because sailors can't wait to calculate the nautical almanack. because they are rational creatures, sailors go to sea with the calculations already done; and all rational creatures go out on the sea of life with their minds made up on the common questions of right and wrong, as well as on many of the much harder questions of wise and foolish. and we can presume that they will continue to do so long as foresight continues to be a human quality. whatever we adopt as the fundamental principle of morality, we need subordinate principles through which to apply it; the absolute need for them is a feature of all moral systems, so it doesn't support any argument against any one system in particular. to argue solemnly in a manner that presupposes this: no such secondary principles can be had; and mankind never did and never will draw any general conclusions from the experience of human life is as totally absurd, i think, as anything that has been advanced in philosophical controversy.

the remainder of the stock arguments against utilitarianism mostly consist in laying to its charge the common infirmities of human nature, and the general difficulties which embarrass conscientious persons in shaping their course through life. we are told that an utilitarian will be apt to make his own particular case an exception to moral rules, and, when under temptation, will see an utility in the breach of a rule, greater than he will see in its observance. but is utility the only creed which is able to furnish us with excuses for evil doing, and means of cheating our own conscience? they are afforded in abundance by all doctrines which recognise as a fact in morals the existence of conflicting considerations; which all doctrines do, that have been believed by sane persons. it is not the fault of any creed, but of the complicated nature of human affairs, that rules of conduct cannot be so framed as to require no exceptions, and that hardly any kind of action can safely be laid down as either always obligatory or always condemnable. there is no ethical creed which does not temper the rigidity of its laws, by giving a certain latitude, under the moral responsibility of the agent, for accommodation to peculiarities of circumstances; and under every creed, at the opening thus made, self-deception and dishonest casuistry get in. there exists no moral system under which there do not arise unequivocal cases of conflicting obligation. these are the real difficulties, the knotty points both in the theory of ethics, and in the conscientious guidance of personal conduct. they are overcome practically with greater or with less success according to the intellect and virtue of the individual; but it can hardly be pretended that any one will be the less qualified for dealing with them, from possessing an ultimate standard to which conflicting rights and duties can be referred. if utility is the ultimate source of moral obligations, utility may be invoked to decide between them when their demands are incompatible. though the application of the standard may be difficult, it is better than none at all: while in other systems, the moral laws all claiming independent authority, there is no common umpire entitled to interfere between them; their claims to precedence one over another rest on little better than sophistry, and unless determined, as they generally are, by the unacknowledged influence of considerations of utility, afford a free scope for the action of personal desires and partialities. we must remember that only in these cases of conflict between secondary principles is it requisite that first principles should be appealed to. there is no case of moral obligation in which some secondary principle is not involved; and if only one, there can seldom be any real doubt which one it is, in the mind of any person by whom the principle itself is recognized.
the remainder of the standard arguments against utilitarianism mostly consist in blaming it for the common infirmities of human nature and the general difficulties that trouble conscientious persons when they are shaping their course through life. we are told that a utilitarian will be apt to make his own particular case an exception to moral rules; and that when he is tempted to do something wrong he will see more utility in doing it than in not doing it. but is utility the only morality that can provide us with excuses for evil doing, and means of cheating our own conscience? of course not! such excuses are provided in abundance by all doctrines that recognise the existence of conflicting considerations as a fact in morals; and this is recognized by every doctrine that any sane person has believed. it is the fault not of any creed but of the complicated nature of human affairs that rules of conduct can't be formulated so that they require no exceptions, and hardly any kind of action can safely be stated to be either always obligatory or always condemnable. every ethical creed softens the rigidity of its laws by giving the morally responsible agent some freedom to adapt his behaviour to special features of his circumstances; and under every creed, at the opening thus made, self-deception and dishonest reasoning get in. every moral system allows for clear cases of conflicting obligation. these are real difficulties, knotty points both in the theory of ethics and in the practical personal matter of living conscientiously. in practice they are overcome, more or less successfully, according to the person's intellect and virtue; but it can't be claimed that having an ultimate standard to which conflicting rights and duties can be referred will make one less qualified to deal with them! if utility is the basic source of moral obligations, utility can be invoked to decide between obligations whose demands are incompatible. the utility standard may be hard to apply, but it is better than having no standard. in other systems, the moral laws all claim independent authority, so that there's no common umpire entitled to settle conflicts between them; when one of them is claimed to have precedence over another, the basis for this is little better than sophistry, allowing free scope for personal desires and preferences (unless the conflict is resolved by the unadmitted influence of considerations of utility). it is only in these cases of conflict between secondary principles that there is any need to appeal to first principles. in every case of moral obligation some secondary principle is involved; and if there is only one, someone who recognizes that principle can seldom be in any real doubt as to which one it is.

chapter iii.
chapter 3: what will motivate us to obey the principle of utility?

the question is often asked, and properly so, in regard to any supposed moral standard what is its sanction? what are the motives to obey it? or more specifically, what is the source of its obligation? whence does it derive its binding force? it is a necessary part of moral philosophy to provide the answer to this question; which, though frequently assuming the shape of an objection to the utilitarian morality, as if it had some special applicability to that above others, really arises in regard to all standards. it arises, in fact, whenever a person is called on to adopt a standard or refer morality to any basis on which he has not been accustomed to rest it. for the customary morality, that which education and opinion have consecrated, is the only one which presents itself to the mind with the feeling of being in itself obligatory; and when a person is asked to believe that this morality derives its obligation from some general principle round which custom has not thrown the same halo, the assertion is to him a paradox; the supposed corollaries seem to have a more binding force than the original theorem; the superstructure seems to stand better without, than with, what is represented as its foundation. he says to himself, i feel that i am bound not to rob or murder, betray or deceive; but why am i bound to promote the general happiness? if my own happiness lies in something else, why may i not give that the preference?
what is its sanction? what are the motives to obey it? or more specifically, what is the source of its obligation? where does it get its binding force from? it is a necessary part of moral philosophy to provide the answer to this question. it often takes the shape of an objection to the utilitarian morality in particular, as though it were specially applicable to that; but really it arises in regard to all standards. it arises, in fact, whenever someone is called on to adopt a standard that is new to him, or to put morality on some basis on which he hasn't been accustomed to rest it. the only morality that presents itself to the mind with the feeling of being in itself obligatory is the customary morality, the one that education and opinion have consecrated; and when a person is asked to believe that this morality derives its obligation from some general principle around which custom has not thrown the same halo, he finds the demand paradoxical; the supposed corollaries seem to have a more binding force than the original theorem; the superstructure seems to stand better without its supposed foundation than with it. he says to himself, i feel that i am bound not to rob or murder, betray or deceive; but why am i bound to promote the general happiness? if my own happiness lies in something else, why may i not give that the preference?

if the view adopted by the utilitarian philosophy of the nature of the moral sense be correct, this difficulty will always present itself, until the influences which form moral character have taken the same hold of the principle which they have taken of some of the consequences until, by the improvement of education, the feeling of unity with our fellow creatures shall be (what it cannot be doubted that christ intended it to be) as deeply rooted in our character, and to our own consciousness as completely a part of our nature, as the horror of crime is in an ordinarily well-brought-up young person. in the mean time, however, the difficulty has no peculiar application to the doctrine of utility, but is inherent in every attempt to analyse morality and reduce it to principles; which, unless the principle is already in men's minds invested with as much sacredness as any of its applications, always seems to divest them of a part of their sanctity.
if the utilitarian philosophy's view of the nature of the moral sense is correct, this difficulty will always present itself, until the influences that form moral character have taken the same hold of the principle that they have taken of some of its consequences. that will be the time when the improvement of education brings about something that christ certainly intended should come about, namely that the feeling of unity with our fellow-creatures should be as deeply rooted in our character, and feel to us to be as completely a part of our nature as the horror of crime is in an ordinarily well brought up young person. while we are waiting for that day to come, the difficulty has no special application to the doctrine of utility, but is inherent in every attempt to analyse morality and organize it under principles. unless the first principle already has in men's minds as much sacredness as any of its applications, this process always seems to deprive the applications of a part of their sanctity.

the principle of utility either has, or there is no reason why it might not have, all the sanctions which belong to any other system of morals. those sanctions are either external or internal. of the external sanctions it is not necessary to speak at any length. they are, the hope of favour and the fear of displeasure from our fellow creatures or from the ruler of the universe, along with whatever we may have of sympathy or affection for them or of love and awe of him, inclining us to do his will independently of selfish consequences. there is evidently no reason why all these motives for observance should not attach themselves to the utilitarian morality, as completely and as powerfully as to any other. indeed, those of them which refer to our fellow creatures are sure to do so, in proportion to the amount of general intelligence; for whether there be any other ground of moral obligation than the general happiness or not, men do desire happiness; and however imperfect may be their own practice, they desire and commend all conduct in others towards themselves, by which they think their happiness is promoted. with regard to the religious motive, if men believe, as most profess to do, in the goodness of god, those who think that conduciveness to the general happiness is the essence, or even only the criterion, of good, must necessarily believe that it is also that which god approves. the whole force therefore of external reward and punishment, whether physical or moral, and whether proceeding from god or from our fellow men, together with all that the capacities of human nature admit, of disinterested devotion to either, become available to enforce the utilitarian morality, in proportion as that morality is recognized; and the more powerfully, the more the appliances of education and general cultivation are bent to the purpose.
the principle of utility either has, or perfectly well could have, all the sanctions that belong to any other system of morals. those sanctions are either external or internal. i needn't spend long on the external sanctions. they are the hope of favour and the fear of displeasure from our fellow creatures or from the ruler of the universe, and also whatever sympathy or affection we may have for them, or whatever love and awe we may have towards him, inclining us to do what they want or what he wants, independently of selfish consequences. obviously there is no reason why all these motives for conforming to moral principles shouldn't attach themselves to the utilitarian morality as completely and as powerfully as to any other. indeed, the motives that refer to our fellow creatures are sure to do so, insofar as people are intelligent enough to make the connection. here is why. whether or not there is any basis of moral obligation other than the general happiness, men do want happiness; and however imperfect a particular person's conduct may be, he does desire and commend all conduct by others that promotes his happiness. with regard to the religious motive: if men believe in the goodness of god (as most of them say they do), those who think that conduciveness to the general happiness is the essence of good, or even just the criterion of good, must believe that general happiness is also what god approves. so the whole force of external reward and punishment, whether physical or moral and whether coming from god or from our fellow men, together with everything that human nature is capable of in the way of disinterested devotion to god or to man, become available as sanctions to enforce obedience to the utilitarian morality, in proportion as that morality is recognised. and the more the techniques of education and general cultivation are put to work on this, the stronger the sanctions will be.

so far as to external sanctions. the internal sanction of duty, whatever our standard of duty may be, is one and the same a feeling in our own mind; a pain, more or less intense, attendant on violation of duty, which in properly cultivated moral natures rises, in the more serious cases, into shrinking from it as an impossibility. this feeling, when disinterested, and connecting itself with the pure idea of duty, and not with some particular form of it, or with any of the merely accessory circumstances, is the essence of conscience; though in that complex phenomenon as it actually exists, the simple fact is in general all encrusted over with collateral associations, derived from sympathy, from love, and still more from fear; from all the forms of religious feeling; from the recollections of childhood and of all our past life; from self-esteem, desire of the esteem of others, and occasionally even self-abasement. this extreme complication is, i apprehend, the origin of the sort of mystical character which, by a tendency of the human mind of which there are many other examples, is apt to be attributed to the idea of moral obligation, and which leads people to believe that the idea cannot possibly attach itself to any other objects than those which, by a supposed mysterious law, are found in our present experience to excite it. its binding force, however, consists in the existence of a mass of feeling which must be broken through in order to do what violates our standard of right, and which, if we do nevertheless violate that standard, will probably have to be encountered afterwards in the form of remorse. whatever theory we have of the nature or origin of conscience, this is what essentially constitutes it.
that's enough about external sanctions. the internal sanction of duty is one and the same, whatever our standard of duty may be. it is a feeling in our own mind, a more or less intense pain that comes with violations of duty; and in properly cultivated moral natures it rises in the more serious cases into shrinking from the violation as an impossibility. when this feeling is disinterested, and connected with the pure idea of duty and not with some particular form of it or with any of the merely accessory circumstances, it is the essence of conscience; though in that complex phenomenon as it actually exists the simple fact of pure conscience is usually all encrusted over with associated feelings derived from sympathy, from love and even more from fear; from all the forms of religious feeling; from memories of childhood and of all our past life; from self-esteem, desire for the esteem of others, and occasionally even self-abasement. it seems to me that this extreme complicatedness is the origin of the sort of mystical character which is apt to be attributed to the idea of moral obligation and which leads people to think that the idea of moral obligation can't possibly attach itself to any objects except the ones that, by a supposed mysterious law, are found in our present experience to arouse it. its binding force, however, consists in the existence of a mass of feeling that must be broken through in order to do what violates our standard of right; and if we do nevertheless violate that standard, the feelings will probably have to be encountered afterwards in the form of remorse. whatever theory we have of the nature or origin of conscience, this is what it essentially consists of.

the ultimate sanction, therefore, of all morality (external motives apart) being a subjective feeling in our own minds, i see nothing embarrassing to those whose standard is utility, in the question, what is the sanction of that particular standard? we may answer, the same as of all other moral standards the conscientious feelings of mankind. undoubtedly this sanction has no binding efficacy on those who do not possess the feelings it appeals to; but neither will these persons be more obedient to any other moral principle than to the utilitarian one. on them morality of any kind has no hold but through the external sanctions. meanwhile the feelings exist, a feet in human nature, the reality of which, and the great power with which they are capable of acting on those in whom they have been duly cultivated, are proved by experience. no reason has ever been shown why they may not be cultivated to as great intensity in connection with the utilitarian, as with any other rule of morals.
since the ultimate sanction of all morality (external motives apart) is a subjective feeling in our own minds, i see nothing awkward for the utilitarian in the question what is the sanction of the utilitarian standard? we can answer, it is the same as of all other moral standards namely the conscientious feelings of mankind. undoubtedly this sanction has no binding force for those who don't have the feelings it appeals to; but these people won't be more obedient to any other moral principle than to the utilitarian one. no morality of any kind has any hold on them except through external sanctions. meanwhile the feelings do exist, a fact in human nature; and experience shows that they are real and that they can act with great power on people in whom they have been duly developed. no reason has ever been shown why they can't be developed to as great intensity in connection with the utilitarian rule of morals as with any other.

there is, i am aware, a disposition to believe that a person who sees in moral obligation a transcendental fact, an objective reality belonging to the province of things in themselves, is likely to be more obedient to it than one who believes it to be entirely subjective, having its seat in human consciousness only. but whatever a person's opinion may be on this point of ontology, the force he is really urged by is his own subjective feeling, and is exactly measured by its strength. no one's belief that duty is an objective reality is stronger than the belief that god is so; yet the belief in god, apart from the expectation of actual reward and punishment, only operates on conduct through, and in proportion to, the subjective religious feeling. the sanction, so far as it is disinterested, is always in the mind itself; and the notion, therefore, of the transcendental moralists must be, that this sanction will not exist in the mind unless it is believed to have its root out of the mind; and that if a person is able to say to himself, that which is restraining me, and which is called my conscience, is only a feeling in my own mind, he may possibly draw the conclusion that when the feeling ceases the obligation ceases, and that if he find the feeling inconvenient, he may disregard it, and endeavour to get rid of it. but is this danger confined to the utilitarian morality? does the belief that moral obligation has its seat outside the mind make the feeling of it too strong to be got rid of? the fact is so far otherwise, that all moralists admit and lament the ease with which, in the generality of minds, conscience can be silenced or stifled. the question, need i obey my conscience? is quite as often put to themselves by persons who never heard of the principle of utility, as by its adherents. those whose conscientious feelings are so weak as to allow of their asking this question, if they answer it affirmatively, will not do so because they believe in the transcendental theory, but because of the external sanctions.
i realize that some people are inclined to believe that a person who sees in moral obligation a transcendental fact, an objective reality belonging to the province of things in themselves is likely to be more obedient to moral obligation than one who believes it to be entirely subjective, being rooted purely in human consciousness. but whatever a person's opinion may be on this metaphysical point, the force he is really urged by is his own subjective feeling, and the power of the force is exactly measured by the strength of the feeling. no-one's belief that duty is an objective reality is stronger than the belief that god is an objective reality; yet the belief in god, apart from the expectation of actual reward and punishment, operates on conduct only through the subjective religious feeling, and the power of the operation is proportional to the strength of the feeling. the sanction, so far as it is disinterested, is always in the mind itself; so the thought of the transcendental moralists i am discussing must be this: this sanction won't exist in the mind unless it is believed to have its root outside the mind. if a person can say to himself what is now restraining me what is called my conscience is only a feeling in my own mind, he may draw the conclusion that when the feeling ceases the obligation also ceases, and that if he finds the feeling inconvenient he may disregard it and try to get rid of it. but is this danger confined to the utilitarian morality? does the belief that moral obligation has its seat outside the mind make the feeling of it too strong for you to get rid of it? the facts are otherwise so much so that all moralists admit and lament how easy it is for conscience to be silenced or stifled in most people's minds. people who never heard of the principle of utility ask themselves need i obey my conscience? just as often as do utilitarians. those whose conscientious feelings are so weak as to allow them to ask this question, if they answer yes they will do so not because they believe in the transcendental theory but because of the external sanctions.

it is not necessary, for the present purpose, to decide whether the feeling of duty is innate or implanted. assuming it to be innate, it is an open question to what objects it naturally attaches itself; for the philosophic supporters of that theory are now agreed that the intuitive perception is of principles of morality, and not of the details. if there be anything innate in the matter, i see no reason why the feeling which is innate should not be that of regard to the pleasures and pains of others. if there is any principle of morals which is intuitively obligatory, i should say it must be that. if so, the intuitive ethics would coincide with the utilitarian, and there would be no further quarrel between them. even as it is, the intuitive moralists, though they believe that there are other intuitive moral obligations, do already believe this to be one; for they unanimously hold that a large portion of morality turns upon the consideration due to the interests of our fellow creatures. therefore, if the belief in the transcendental origin of moral obligation gives any additional efficacy to the internal sanction, it appears to me that the utilitarian principle has already the benefit of it.
it isn't necessary for present purposes to decide whether the feeling of duty is innate or implanted. assuming it to be innate, the question remains as to what duties the feeling naturally attaches itself to; for the philosophic supporters of the innateness theory are now agreed that what is given to us innately what we have an intuitive perception of is the principles of morality and not its details. if there is anything innate in all this, i don't see why the feeling that is innate shouldn't be the feeling of concern for the pleasures and pains of others. if any principle of morals is intuitively obligatory, i should say it must be that one. if so, intuitive innatist ethics would coincide with utilitarian ethics, and there would be no further quarrel between them. even as things stand, although the intuitive moralists believe that there are other intuitive moral obligations, they do already believe that this the obligation to seek the welfare of others is one; for they all hold that a large portion of morality turns on the consideration that should be given to the interests of our fellow-creatures. so if the belief in the transcendental origin of moral obligation does give any additional force to the internal sanction, it appears to me that the utilitarian principle already has the benefit of it.

on the other hand, if, as is my own belief, the moral feelings are not innate, but acquired, they are not for that reason the less natural. it is natural to man to speak, to reason, to build cities, to cultivate the ground, though these are acquired faculties. the moral feelings are not indeed a part of our nature, in the sense of being in any perceptible degree present in all of us; but this, unhappily, is a fact admitted by those who believe the most strenuously in their transcendental origin. like the other acquired capacities above referred to, the moral faculty, if not a part of our nature, is a natural outgrowth from it; capable, like them, in a certain small degree, of springing up spontaneously; and susceptible of being brought by cultivation to a high degree of development. unhappily it is also susceptible, by a sufficient use of the external sanctions and of the force of early impressions, of being cultivated in almost any direction: so that there is hardly anything so absurd or so mischievous that it may not, by means of these influences, be made to act on the human mind with all the authority of conscience. to doubt that the same potency might be given by the same means to the principle of utility, even if it had no foundation in human nature, would be flying in the face of all experience.
on the other hand, if the moral feelings are not innate but acquired (as i think they are), that doesn't make them any less natural. it is natural for man to speak, to reason, to build cities, to cultivate the ground, though these are acquired abilities. the moral feelings are indeed not a part of our nature in the sense of being detectably present in all of us; but this is a sad fact admitted by the most strenuous believers in the transcendental origin of those feelings. like the other acquired capacities i have referred to, the moral faculty, if not a part of our nature, is a natural outgrowth from it. like them, it can to a certain small extent spring up spontaneously and can be brought by cultivation to a high degree of development. unfortunately, it can by a sufficient use of external sanctions and of the force of early impressions be cultivated in almost any direction; so that there is hardly anything so absurd or so mischievous that these influences can't make it act on the human mind with all the authority of conscience. to doubt that the same power might be given by the same means to the principle of utility, even if it had no foundation in human nature, would be flying in the face of all experience.

but moral associations which are wholly of artificial creation, when intellectual culture goes on, yield by degrees to the dissolving force of analysis: and if the feeling of duty, when associated with utility, would appear equally arbitrary; if there were no leading department of our nature, no powerful class of sentiments, with which that association would harmonize, which would make us feel it congenial, and incline us not only to foster it in others (for which we have abundant interested motives), but also to cherish it in ourselves; if there were not, in short, a natural basis of sentiment for utilitarian morality, it might well happen that this association also, even after it had been implanted by education, might be analysed away.
but while the culture of the intellect continues, purely artificial moral associations gradually give way through the dissolving force of analysis. if this were the case: the feeling of duty when associated with utility seems as arbitrary as any of those others; there is no prominent part of our make-up, no powerful class of feelings, with which that association harmonizes, making us feel it as congenial and inclining us not only to encourage it in others (for which we have abundant self-interested motives), but also to value it in ourselves; in short, utilitarian morality has no natural basis in our feelings,

but there is this basis of powerful natural sentiment; and this it is which, when once the general happiness is recognized as the ethical standard, will constitute the strength of the utilitarian morality. this firm foundation is that of the social feelings of mankind; the desire to be in unity with our fellow creatures, which is already a powerful principle in human nature, and happily one of those which tend to become stronger, even without express inculcation, from the influences of advancing civilization. the social state is at once so natural, so necessary, and so habitual to man, that, except in some unusual circumstances or by an effort of voluntary abstraction, he never conceives himself otherwise than as a member of a body; and this association is riveted more and more, as mankind are further removed from the state of savage independence. any condition, therefore, which is essential to a state of society, becomes more and more an inseparable part of every person's conception of the state of things which he is born into, and which is the destiny of a human being. now, society between human beings, except in the relation of master and slave, is manifestly impossible on any other footing than that the interests of all are to be consulted. society between equals can only exist on the understanding that the interests of all are to be regarded equally. and since in all states of civilization, every person, except an absolute monarch, has equals, every one is obliged to live on these terms with somebody; and in every age some advance is made towards a state in which it will be impossible to live permanently on other terms with anybody. in this way people grow up unable to conceive as possible to them a state of total disregard of other people's interests. they are under a necessity of conceiving themselves as at least abstaining from all the grosser injuries, and (if only for their own protection.) living in a state of constant protest against them. they are also familiar with the fact of co-operating with others, and proposing to themselves a collective, not an individual, interest, as the aim (at least for the time being) of their actions. so long as they are co-operating, their ends are identified with those of others; there is at least a temporary feeling that the interests of others are their own interests. not only does all strengthening of social ties, and all healthy growth of society, give to each individual a stronger personal interest in practically consulting the welfare of others; it also leads him to identify his feelings more and more with their good, or at least with an ever greater degree of practical consideration for it. he comes, as though instinctively, to be conscious of himself as a being who of course pays regard to others. the good of others becomes to him a thing naturally and necessarily to be attended to, like any of the physical conditions of our existence. now, whatever amount of this feeling a person has, he is urged by the strongest motives both of interest and of sympathy to demonstrate it, and to the utmost of his power encourage it in others; and even if he has none of it himself, he is as greatly interested as any one else that others should have it. consequently, the smallest germs of the feeling are laid hold of and nourished by the contagion of sympathy and the influences of education; and a complete web of corroborative association is woven round it, by the powerful agency of the external sanctions. this mode of conceiving ourselves and human life, as civilization goes on, is felt to be more and more natural. every step in political improvement renders it more so, by removing the sources of opposition of interest, and levelling those inequalities of legal privilege between individuals or classes, owing to which there are large portions of mankind whose happiness it is still practicable to disregard. in an improving state of the human mind, the influences are constantly on the increase, which tend to generate in each individual a feeling of unity with all the rest; which feeling, if perfect, would make him never think of, or desire, any beneficial condition for himself, in the benefits of which they are not included. if we now suppose this feeling of unity to be taught as a religion, and the whole force of education, of institutions, and of opinion, directed, as it once was in the case of religion, to make every person grow up from infancy surrounded on all sides both by the profession and by the practice of it, i think that no one, who can realize this conception, will feel any misgiving about the sufficiency of the ultimate sanction for the happiness morality. to any ethical student who finds the realization difficult, i recommend, as a means of facilitating it, the second of m. comte's two principal works, the systeme de politique positive. i entertain the strongest objections to the system of politics and morals set forth in that treatise; but i think it has superabundantly shown the possibility of giving to the service of humanity, even without the aid of belief in a providence, both the physical power and the social efficacy of a religion; making it take hold of human life, and colour all thought, feeling, and action, in a manner of which the greatest ascendency ever exercised by any religion may be but a type and foretaste; and of which the danger is, not that it should be insufficient, but that it should be so excessive as to interfere unduly with human freedom and individuality.
in that case it might well happen that this association of duty with utility was analysed away, even after it had been implanted by education. but there is this basis of powerful natural sentiment; and this will constitute the strength of the utilitarian morality once general happiness is recognised as the ethical standard. this firm foundation is that of the social feelings of mankind; the desire to be in unity with our fellow creatures. it is already a powerful force in human nature, and fortunately one of those that tend to be made stronger even without being explicitly taught by the influences of advancing civilisation. the social state is at once so natural, so necessary and so habitual to a man that, except in some unusual circumstances or an effortful thought-experiment, he never thinks of himself as anything but a member of a group; and this association becomes stronger and stronger as mankind moves further from the state of savage independence. thus, any condition that is essential to a state of society becomes more and more an inseparable part of each person's conception of the state of things that he is born into and that is the destiny of a human being. now society between human beings except in the relation of master to slave is obviously impossible on any other basis than that the interests of all are to be consulted. society between equals can only exist on the understanding that the interests of all are to be regarded equally. and since in all states of civilisation every person except an absolute monarch has equals, everyone is obliged to live on these terms with somebody; and in every age some advance is made towards a state in which it will be impossible to live permanently with anybody except on terms of equality. in this way people grow up unable to think of a state of total disregard of other people's interests as one they could possibly live in. they have to conceive of themselves as at least refraining from all the most harmful crimes and (if only for their own protection) living in a state of constant protest against them. they are also familiar with the fact of co-operating with others and of acting (at least for the time being) in the interests of a group rather than of themselves as individuals. so long as they are co-operating, their purposes are identified with those of others; there is at least a temporary feeling that the interests of others are their own interests. all strengthening of social ties and all healthy growth of society gives to each individual a stronger personal interest in acting with regard for the welfare of others; and it also leads him to identify his feelings more and more with their good, or at least with an even greater degree of concern for it in his actions. he comes, as though instinctively, to be conscious of himself as a being who pays regard to others as a matter of course. the good of others becomes to him a thing naturally and necessarily to be attended to, like any of the physical conditions of our existence. now, however much or little of this feeling a person has, he has the strongest motives both of self-interest and of sympathy to express this feeling in his behaviour, and to do all he can to encourage it in others; and even if he has none of it himself, it is as much in his interests as in anyone else's that others should have it. consequently the smallest seeds of the feeling are laid hold of and nourished by the contagion of sympathy and the influences of education; and a complete web of supporting association is woven around it by the powerful force of the external sanctions. as civilisation goes on, this way of thinking about ourselves and about human life is increasingly felt to be natural. every step in political improvement makes it more so, by removing the sources of conflicts of interest, and removing the inequalities in legal status between individuals or classes, because of which it is still practicable to disregard the happiness of large portions of mankind. as the human mind improves, there is a steady increase in the influences that tend to generate in each individual a feeling of unity with all the rest; a feeling which in its perfect state would make him never think of or want any benefit for himself if it didn't also involve benefits for all the rest. now suppose this were the case:

neither is it necessary to the feeling which constitutes the binding force of the utilitarian morality on those who recognize it, to wait for those social influences which would make its obligation felt by mankind at large. in the comparatively early state of human advancement in which we now live, a person cannot indeed feel that entireness of sympathy with all others, which would make any real discordance in the general direction of their conduct in life impossible; but already a person in whom the social feeling is at all developed, cannot bring himself to think of the rest of his fellow creatures as struggling rivals with him for the means of happiness, whom he must desire to see defeated in their object in order that he may succeed in his. the deeply-rooted conception which every individual even now has of himself as a social being, tends to make him feel it one of his natural wants that there should be harmony between his feelings and aims and those of his fellow creatures. if differences of opinion and of mental culture make it impossible for him to share many of their actual feelings-perhaps make him denounce and defy those feelings-he still needs to be conscious that his real aim and theirs do not conflict; that he is not opposing himself to what they really wish for, namely, their own good, but is, on the contrary, promoting it. this feeling in most individuals is much inferior in strength to their selfish feelings, and is often wanting altogether. but to those who have it, it possesses all the characters of a natural feeling. it does not present itself to their minds as a superstition of education, or a law despotically imposed by the power of society, but as an attribute which it would not be well for them to be without. this conviction is the ultimate sanction of the greatest-happiness morality. this it is which makes any mind, of well-developed feelings, work with, and not against, the outward motives to care for others, afforded by what i have called the external sanctions; and when those sanctions are wanting, or act in an opposite direction, constitutes in itself a powerful internal binding force, in proportion to the sensitiveness and thoughtfulness of the character; since few but those whose mind is a moral blank, could bear to lay out their course of life on the plan of paying no regard to others except so far as their own private interest compels.
this feeling of unity that constitutes the binding force of the utilitarian morality on those who accept it doesn't have to wait until  everyone has it. it's true that in the comparatively early state of human advancement in which we now live, a person can't feel such total sympathy with everyone else that he couldn't do anything that would work against their interests; but even now a person in whom the social feeling is at all developed can't bring himself to think of the rest of his fellow creatures as struggling rivals with him for the means of happiness, rivals whom he must want to see defeated in their aims so that he can succeed in his. the deeply rooted conception that every individual has of himself as a social being, even now, tends to make him feel it as one of his natural wants that his feelings and aims should harmonize with those of his fellow creatures. (if differences of opinion and of mental culture make it impossible for him to share many of their actual feelings perhaps even make him denounce and defy those feelings he still needs to be aware that his real aim doesn't conflict with theirs, and that he isn't opposing but promoting what they really wish for, namely their own good.) in most individuals this feeling of unity is much weaker than their selfish feelings, and is often entirely lacking. but to those who have it, it bears all the marks of a natural feeling. it doesn't present itself to their minds as a superstition they were brought up in or a law forced on them by the power of society, but as an attribute that it would be bad for them to lack. this conviction is the ultimate sanction of the greatest happiness morality. it is this that makes any mind with well-developed feelings work with rather than against the outward motives to care for others, the motives provided by what i have called the external sanctions; and when those sanctions are absent or act in an opposite direction, constitutes in itself an internal binding force that is strong in proportion to the sensitiveness and thoughtfulness of the person's character. apart from people whose mind is a moral blank, few could bear to lay out their course of life on the plan of paying no regard to others except in ways that would serve their own interests.

chapter iv. of what sort of proof the principle of utility is susceptible.
chapter 4: what sort of proof can be given for the principle of utility?

it has already been remarked, that questions of ultimate ends do not admit of proof, in the ordinary acceptation of the term. to be incapable of proof by reasoning is common to all first principles; to the first premises of our knowledge, as well as to those of our conduct. but the former, being matters of fact, may be the subject of a direct appeal to the faculties which judge of fact namely, our senses, and our internal consciousness. can an appeal be made to the same faculties on questions of practical ends? or by what other faculty is cognizance taken of them?
i have already remarked here that questions of ultimate ends don't admit of proof in the ordinary meaning of that term. it's true of all first principles the first premises of our knowledge, as well as those of our conduct that they can't be proved by reasoning. but the first principles of our knowledge, being matters of fact, can be the subject of a direct appeal to the faculties that make judgments of fact namely our outer senses and our internal consciousness. can an appeal be made to those same faculties on questions of practical ends? if not, what other faculty is used for us to know them?

questions about ends are, in other words, questions what things are desirable. the utilitarian doctrine is, that happiness is desirable, and the only thing desirable, as an end; all other things being only desirable as means to that end. what ought to be required of this doctrine what conditions is it requisite that the doctrine should fulfil to make good its claim to be believed?
questions about ends are, in other words, questions what things are desirable. the utilitarian doctrine is that happiness is desirable as an end, and is the only thing that is so; anything else that is desirable is only desirable as means to that end. what should be required regarding this doctrine what conditions must it fulfil to justify its claim to be believed?

the only proof capable of being given that an object is visible, is that people actually see it. the only proof that a sound is audible, is that people hear it: and so of the other sources of our experience. in like manner, i apprehend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that anything is desirable, is that people do actually desire it. if the end which the utilitarian doctrine proposes to itself were not, in theory and in practice, acknowledged to be an end, nothing could ever convince any person that it was so. no reason can be given why the general happiness is desirable, except that each person, so far as he believes it to be attainable, desires his own happiness. this, however, being a fact, we have not only all the proof which the case admits of, but all which it is possible to require, that happiness is a good: that each person's happiness is a good to that person, and the general happiness, therefore, a good to the aggregate of all persons. happiness has made out its title as one of the ends of conduct, and consequently one of the criteria of morality.
the only proof capable of being given that an object is visible is that people actually see it. the only proof that a sound is audible is that people hear it; and similarly with the other sources of our experience. in like manner, i apprehend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that anything is desirable is that people do actually desire it. if happiness, the end that the utilitarian doctrine proposes to itself, were not acknowledged in theory and in practice to be an end, nothing could ever convince any person that it was an end. no reason can be given why the general happiness is desirable, except the fact that each person desires his own happiness, so far as he thinks it is attainable. but this is a fact; so we have not only all the proof there could be for such a proposition, and all the proof that could possibly be demanded, that happiness is a good, that each person's happiness is a good to that person, and therefore that general happiness is a good to the aggregate of all persons. happiness has made good its claim to be one of the ends of conduct, and consequently one of the criteria of morality.

but it has not, by this alone, proved itself to be the sole criterion. to do that, it would seem, by the same rule, necessary to show, not only that people desire happiness, but that they never desire anything else. now it is palpable that they do desire things which, in common language, are decidedly distinguished from happiness. they desire, for example, virtue, and the absence of vice, no less really than pleasure and the absence of pain. the desire of virtue is not as universal, but it is as authentic a fact, as the desire of happiness. and hence the opponents of the utilitarian standard deem that they have a right to infer that there are other ends of human action besides happiness, and that happiness is not the standard of approbation and disapprobation.
but this alone doesn't prove it to be the sole criterion. to prove that in the same way, it seems, we would have to show not only that people desire happiness but that they never desire anything else. now it's obvious that they do desire things that common language sharply distinguishes from happiness. for example, they desire virtue and the absence of vice, and this desire is just as real as their desire for pleasure and the absence of pain. the desire for virtue is not as universal as the desire for happiness, but it is just as authentic a fact as the other. so the opponents of the utilitarian standard think they have a right to infer that there are other ends of human action besides happiness, and that happiness is not the standard for approval and disapproval.

but does the utilitarian doctrine deny that people desire virtue, or maintain that virtue is not a thing to be desired? the very reverse. it maintains not only that virtue is to be desired, but that it is to be desired disinterestedly, for itself. whatever may be the opinion of utilitarian moralists as to the original conditions by which virtue is made virtue; however they may believe (as they do) that actions and dispositions are only virtuous because they promote another end than virtue; yet this being granted, and it having been decided, from considerations of this description, what is virtuous, they not only place virtue at the very head of the things which are good as means to the ultimate end, but they also recognise as a psychological fact the possibility of its being, to the individual, a good in itself, without looking to any end beyond it; and hold, that the mind is not in a right state, not in a state conformable to utility, not in the state most conducive to the general happiness, unless it does love virtue in this manner as a thing desirable in itself, even although, in the individual instance, it should not produce those other desirable consequences which it tends to produce, and on account of which it is held to be virtue. this opinion is not, in the smallest degree, a departure from the happiness principle. the ingredients of happiness are very various, and each of them is desirable in itself, and not merely when considered as swelling an aggregate. the principle of utility does not mean that any given pleasure, as music, for instance, or any given exemption from pain, as for example health, are to be looked upon as means to a collective something termed happiness, and to be desired on that account. they are desired and desirable in and for themselves; besides being means, they are a part of the end. virtue, according to the utilitarian doctrine, is not naturally and originally part of the end, but it is capable of becoming so; and in those who love it disinterestedly it has become so, and is desired and cherished, not as a means to happiness, but as a part of their happiness.
but does the utilitarian doctrine deny that people desire virtue, or maintain that virtue is not something to be desired? quite the contrary! it maintains not only that virtue is to be desired, but further that virtue is to be desired disinterestedly, for itself. utilitarian moralists believe that actions and dispositions are virtuous only because they promote an end other than virtue; and that it is on this basis that we decide what is virtuous. but set all that aside; it is still open to the utilitarians to place virtue at the very head of the things that are good as means to the ultimate end. they also recognise as a psychological fact that an individual could regard virtue as a good in itself, without looking to any end beyond it; and they hold this: the mind is not in a right state, not in a state consistent with utility, not in the state most conducive to the general happiness, unless it does love virtue in this manner as something that is desirable in itself even when, in the particular case, it wouldn't produce those other desirable consequences that it tends in general to produce. this opinion doesn't depart in the slightest from the happiness principle. the ingredients of happiness are very various, and each of them is desirable in itself and not merely when considered as adding to some total. the principle of utility doesn't mean that any given pleasure (music, for instance) and any given freedom from pain (good health, for instance) is to be looked on only as a means to a collective something called happiness, and to be desired only on that account. they are desired and desirable in and for themselves; besides being means to the end they are also a part of it. well, according to the utilitarian doctrine, virtue is not naturally and originally part of the end (happiness) but it is capable of becoming so; and in those who unselfishly love it virtue has become so, and is desired and cherished not as a means to happiness but as a part of their happiness.

to illustrate this farther, we may remember that virtue is not the only thing, originally a means, and which if it were not a means to anything else, would be and remain indifferent, but which by association with what it is a means to, comes to be desired for itself, and that too with the utmost intensity. what, for example, shall we say of the love of money? there is nothing originally more desirable about money than about any heap of glittering pebbles. its worth is solely that of the things which it will buy; the desires for other things than itself, which it is a means of gratifying. yet the love of money is not only one of the strongest moving forces of human life, but money is, in many cases, desired in and for itself; the desire to possess it is often stronger than the desire to use it, and goes on increasing when all the desires which point to ends beyond it, to be compassed by it, are falling off. it may be then said truly, that money is desired not for the sake of an end, but as part of the end. from being a means to happiness, it has come to be itself a principal ingredient of the individual's conception of happiness. the same may be said of the majority of the great objects of human life power, for example, or fame; except that to each of these there is a certain amount of immediate pleasure annexed, which has at least the semblance of being naturally inherent in them; a thing which cannot be said of money. still, however, the strongest natural attraction, both of power and of fame, is the immense aid they give to the attainment of our other wishes; and it is the strong association thus generated between them and all our objects of desire, which gives to the direct desire of them the intensity it often assumes, so as in some characters to surpass in strength all other desires. in these cases the means have become a part of the end, and a more important part of it than any of the things which they are means to. what was once desired as an instrument for the attainment of happiness, has come to be desired for its own sake. in being desired for its own sake it is, however, desired as part of happiness. the person is made, or thinks he would be made, happy by its mere possession; and is made unhappy by failure to obtain it. the desire of it is not a different thing from the desire of happiness, any more than the love of music, or the desire of health. they are included in happiness. they are some of the elements of which the desire of happiness is made up. happiness is not an abstract idea, but a concrete whole; and these are some of its parts. and the utilitarian standard sanctions and approves their being so. life would be a poor thing, very ill provided with sources of happiness, if there were not this provision of nature, by which things originally indifferent, but conducive to, or otherwise associated with, the satisfaction of our primitive desires, become in themselves sources of pleasure more valuable than the primitive pleasures, both in permanency, in the space of human existence that they are capable of covering, and even in intensity. virtue, according to the utilitarian conception, is a good of this description. there was no original desire of it, or motive to it, save its conduciveness to pleasure, and especially to protection from pain. but through the association thus formed, it may be felt a good in itself, and desired as such with as great intensity as any other good; and with this difference between it and the love of money, of power, or of fame, that all of these may, and often do, render the individual noxious to the other members of the society to which he belongs, whereas there is nothing which makes him so much a blessing to them as the cultivation of the disinterested, love of virtue. and consequently, the utilitarian standard, while it tolerates and approves those other acquired desires, up to the point beyond which they would be more injurious to the general happiness than promotive of it, enjoins and requires the cultivation of the love of virtue up to the greatest strength possible, as being above all things important to the general happiness.
it was originally a means to something that is desired, and if it weren't a means to anything else it would be of no interest to anyone; but by association with what it is a means to it comes to be desired for itself, and indeed desired with the utmost intensity. what i have in mind is money. there is nothing intrinsically more desirable about money than about any heap of glittering pebbles. its value is solely the value of the things that it will buy; the desire for it is the desire for other things that it can lead to. yet the love of money is not only one of the strongest moving forces of human life, but many people desire money in and for itself; the desire to have it is often stronger than the desire to use it, and goes on getting stronger even when the person is losing all the desires that point to ends to which money might be a means. so it is true to say that money is desired not for the sake of an end but as part of the end. from being a means to happiness it has come to be itself a principal ingredient of the individual's conception of happiness. the same may be said of most of the great objects of human life power, for example, or fame; except that each of these brings a certain amount of immediate pleasure, which at least seems to be naturally inherent in them, whereas nothing like that can be said about money. still, the strongest natural attraction of power and of fame is the immense aid they give to the attainment of our other wishes; this generates a strong association between them and all our objects of desire; and that association gives to the direct desire for power or fame the intensity it often has, so that in some people it is stronger than all other desires. in these cases the means have become a part of the end, and a more important part of it than any of the things that they are means to. what was once desired as a help towards getting happiness has come to be desired for its own sake as a part of happiness. the person is made, or thinks he would be made, happy by merely having power or fame, and is made unhappy by failure to get it. the desire for it isn't a different thing from the desire for happiness, any more than is the love of music or the desire for health. they are included in happiness. they are some of the elements of which the desire for happiness is made up. happiness is not an abstract idea, but a concrete whole; and these are some of its parts. and the utilitarian standard allows and approves of their being so. life would be a poor thing, very poorly provided with sources of happiness, if nature didn't arrange for this way in which things that are intrinsically indifferent, but lead to or are otherwise associated with the satisfaction of our basic desires, become in themselves sources of pleasure more valuable than the basic pleasures more permanent  and more intense. virtue, according to the utilitarian conception, is a good of this description. originally the only reason for wanting it was its conduciveness to pleasure and especially to protection from pain. but this created an association of virtue with pleasure and absence of pain, and through this association virtue can be felt to be a good in itself, and can be desired as such with as much intensity as any other good. the desire for virtue differs from the love of money, of power, of fame, in this: those three can and often do make the person noxious to the other members of the society to which he belongs, whereas the disinterested love of virtue makes him a blessing to them nothing more so! and so the utilitarian standard, while it tolerates and approves those other acquired desires up to the point beyond which they would do more harm than good to the general happiness, demands the cultivation of the love of virtue up to the greatest strength possible because it is more important than anything else to the general happiness.

it results from the preceding considerations, that there is in reality nothing desired except happiness. whatever is desired otherwise than as a means to some end beyond itself, and ultimately to happiness, is desired as itself a part of happiness, and is not desired for itself until it has become so. those who desire virtue for its own sake, desire it either because the consciousness of it is a pleasure, or because the consciousness of being without it is a pain, or for both reasons united; as in truth the pleasure and pain seldom exist separately, but almost always together, the same person feeling pleasure in the degree of virtue attained, and pain in not having attained more. if one of these gave him no pleasure, and the other no pain, he would not love or desire virtue, or would desire it only for the other benefits which it might produce to himself or to persons whom he cared for. we have now, then, an answer to the question, of what sort of proof the principle of utility is susceptible. if the opinion which i have now stated is psychologically true if human nature is so constituted as to desire nothing which is not either a part of happiness or a means of happiness, we can have no other proof, and we require no other, that these are the only things desirable. if so, happiness is the sole end of human action, and the promotion of it the test by which to judge of all human conduct; from whence it necessarily follows that it must be the criterion of morality, since a part is included in the whole.
the upshot of the preceding lines of thought is that really nothing is desired except happiness. anything that is desired otherwise than as a means to some end beyond itself (and ultimately a means to happiness) is desired as being itself a part of happiness, and it isn't desired for itself until it has become so. those who desire virtue for its own sake desire it either because a person's awareness of his virtue is a pleasure, or because his awareness of his not being virtuous is a pain, or for both reasons united. for the fact is that this pleasure and pain seldom exist separately, but almost always together: one person feels pleasure at the degree of virtue he has achieved, and pain at not having achieved more. if one of these gave him no pleasure, and the other no pain, he wouldn't love or desire virtue, or would desire it only for the other benefits that it might produce for himself or for persons whom he cared for. so now we have an answer to the question: what sort of proof can be given for the principle of utility? if the opinion that i have now stated is psychologically true if human nature is so constituted that we desire nothing that isn't either a part of happiness or a means to it we can't have and don't need any other proof that these are the only desirable things. if so, happiness is the only end of human action, and the promotion of it is the test by which to judge all human conduct; from which it necessarily follows that it must be the criterion of morality, since a part is included in the whole.

and now to decide whether this is really so; whether mankind do desire nothing for itself but that which is a pleasure to them, or of which the absence is a pain; we have evidently arrived at a question of fact and experience, dependent, like all similar questions, upon evidence. it can only be determined by practised self-consciousness and self-observation, assisted by observation of others. i believe that these sources of evidence, impartially consulted, will declare that desiring a thing and finding it pleasant, aversion to it and thinking of it as painful, are phenomena entirely inseparable, or rather two parts of the same phenomenon; in strictness of language, two different modes of naming the same psychological fact: that to think of an object as desirable (unless for the sake of its consequences), and to think of it as pleasant, are one and the same thing; and that to desire anything, except in proportion as the idea of it is pleasant, is a physical and metaphysical impossibility.
is this really so? do human beings desire nothing for itself except that which is a pleasure to them or that whose absence is a pain? we are now confronted by a question of fact and experience, which like all such questions depends on evidence. it can only be answered by practised self-awareness and self-observation, assisted by observation of others. i believe that when these sources of evidence are consulted without any bias, they will declare that desiring a thing and finding it pleasant, are entirely inseparable phenomena, or rather they are two parts of the same phenomenon, and that the same is true of aversion to a thing and thinking of it as painful. strictly speaking, they are two different ways of naming the same psychological fact; to think of an object as desirable (unless as a means) and to think of it as pleasant are one and the same thing; and it is a physical and metaphysical impossibility to desire anything except in proportion as the idea of it is pleasant.

so obvious does this appear to me, that i expect it will hardly be disputed: and the objection made will be, not that desire can possibly be directed to anything ultimately except pleasure and exemption from pain, but that the will is a different thing from desire; that a person of confirmed virtue, or any other person whose purposes are fixed, carries out his purposes without any thought of the pleasure he has in contemplating them, or expects to derive from their fulfilment; and persists in acting on them, even though these pleasures are much diminished, by changes in his character or decay of his passive sensibilities, or are outweighed by the pains which the pursuit of the purposes may bring upon him. all this i fully admit, and have stated it elsewhere, as positively and emphatically as any one. will, the active phenomenon, is a different thing from desire, the state of passive sensibility, and though originally an offshoot from it, may in time take root and detach itself from the parent stock; so much so, that in the case of an habitual purpose, instead of willing the thing because we desire it, we often desire it only because we will it. this, however, is but an instance of that familiar fact, the power of habit, and is nowise confined to the case of virtuous actions. many indifferent things, which men originally did from a motive of some sort, they continue to do from habit. sometimes this is done unconsciously, the consciousness coming only after the action: at other times with conscious volition, but volition which has become habitual, and is put into operation by the force of habit, in opposition perhaps to the deliberate preference, as often happens with those who have contracted habits of vicious or hurtful indulgence. third and last comes the case in which the habitual act of will in the individual instance is not in contradiction to the general intention prevailing at other times, but in fulfilment of it; as in the case of the person of confirmed virtue, and of all who pursue deliberately and consistently any determinate end. the distinction between will and desire thus understood, is an authentic and highly important psychological fact; but the fact consists solely in this that will, like all other parts of our constitution, is amenable to habit, and that we may will from habit what we no longer desire for itself, or desire only because we will it. it is not the less true that will, in the beginning, is entirely produced by desire; including in that term the repelling influence of pain as well as the attractive one of pleasure. let us take into consideration, no longer the person who has a confirmed will to do right, but him in whom that virtuous will is still feeble, conquerable by temptation, and not to be fully relied on; by what means can it be strengthened? how can the will to be virtuous, where it does not exist in sufficient force, be implanted or awakened? only by making the person desire virtue by making him think of it in a pleasurable light, or of its absence in a painful one. it is by associating the doing right with pleasure, or the doing wrong with pain, or by eliciting and impressing and bringing home to the person's experience the pleasure naturally involved in the one or the pain in the other, that it is possible to call forth that will to be virtuous, which, when confirmed, acts without any thought of either pleasure or pain. will is the child of desire, and passes out of the dominion of its parent only to come under that of habit. that which is the result of habit affords no presumption of being intrinsically good; and there would be no reason for wishing that the purpose of virtue should become independent of pleasure and pain, were it not that the influence of the pleasurable and painful associations which prompt to virtue is not sufficiently to be depended on for unerring constancy of action until it has acquired the support of habit. both in feeling and in conduct, habit is the only thing which imparts certainty; and it is because of the importance to others of being able to rely absolutely on one's feelings and conduct, and to oneself of being able to rely on one's own, that the will to do right ought to be cultivated into this habitual independence. in other words, this state of the will is a means to good, not intrinsically a good; and does not contradict the doctrine that nothing is a good to human beings but in so far as it is either itself pleasurable, or a means of attaining pleasure or averting pain.
this seems to me to be so obvious that i expect it will hardly be disputed. the objection that will be made is not that desire could be ultimately directed to something other than pleasure and freedom from pain, but that the will is a different thing from desire; and a solidly virtuous person or any other person whose purposes are fixed carries out his purposes without any thought of the pleasure he has in contemplating them or expects to get from their fulfilment; and he persists in acting on his purposes even if these pleasures are greatly lessened by changes in his character or the weakening of his passive sensibilities (i.e. his desires), or are outweighed by the pains that the pursuit of his purposes may bring on him. all this i fully admit, and have stated it elsewhere as positively and emphatically as anyone. will is an active phenomenon, and is a different thing from desire, which is the state of passive sensibility. though originally an offshoot from desire, will can in time take root and detach itself from the parent stock; so much so that in the case of an habitual purpose, instead of willing the thing because we desire it we often desire it only because we will it. but this is merely an instance of a familiar phenomenon, namely the power of habit, and isn't at all confined to the case of virtuous actions. (1) many indifferent things that men originally did from a motive of some sort they continue to do from habit. sometimes this is done unconsciously, with the person becoming aware of it only after the action; at other times it is done with conscious volition, but volition that has become habitual and is put into operation by the force of habit. (2) this may be in opposition to the person's deliberate preference, as often happens with those who have acquired habits of vicious or hurtful self-indulgence. (3) or it may be that the habitual act of will in the individual instance is not in contradiction to the general intention prevailing at other times but in fulfilment of it. that's the case for a person of confirmed virtue, and for anyone who deliberately and consistently pursues any definite end. the distinction between will and desire, understood in this way, is an authentic and highly important psychological fact; but the fact consists solely in this that will, like all every other part of our make-up, is amenable to habit, and that we can will from habit something we no longer desire for itself or desire only because we will it. it is still true that will at the beginning is entirely produced by desire taking desire to cover the repelling influence of pain as well as the attractive influence of pleasure. now let us set aside the person who has a confirmed will to do right, and think about the one in whom that virtuous will is still feeble, conquerable by temptation, and not to be fully relied on; how can it be strengthened in him? where the will to be virtuous doesn't exist in sufficient force, how can it be implanted or awakened? only by making the person desire virtue by making him think of it in a pleasurable light, or of its absence in a painful one. by associating right-doing with pleasure or wrong-doing with pain, or by bringing out and impressing and bringing home to the person's experience the pleasure naturally involved in doing right or the pain in doing wrong, it is possible to call forth that will to be virtuous which, when it is firmly built into the person's make-up, acts without any thought of either pleasure or pain. will is the child of desire, and moves out of the control of its parent only to come under the control of habit. something's being a result of habit doesn't count towards its being intrinsically good; and the only reason for wishing that the purpose of virtue should become independent of pleasure and pain by becoming habitual is the fact that the influence of the pleasurable and painful associations that prompt virtuous behaviour can't be depended on for unerring constancy of action until it has acquired the support of habit. habit is the only thing that makes patterns of feeling and conduct certain; and it is because of the importance to others of being able to rely absolutely on one's feelings and conduct, and the importance of this to oneself, that the will to do right should be made to grow into this habitual independence this independence from desire that is bought about by habit. in other words, this virtuous state of the will is a means to good, not intrinsically a good; and so it doesn't contradict the doctrine that nothing is a good to human beings except to the extent that it is either itself pleasurable or is a means of getting pleasure or avoiding pain. but if this doctrine is true, the principle of utility is proved. whether the doctrine is true must now be left to the judgment of the thoughtful reader.

but if this doctrine be true, the principle of utility is proved. whether it is so or not, must now be left to the consideration of the thoughtful reader. chapter v. on the connexion between justice and utility.
chapter 5: the connection between justice and utility

in all ages of speculation, one of the strongest obstacles to the reception of the doctrine that utility or happiness is the criterion of right and wrong, has been drawn from the idea of justice, the powerful sentiment, and apparently clear perception, which that word recalls with a rapidity and certainty resembling an instinct, have seemed to the majority of thinkers to point to an inherent quality in things; to show that the just must have an existence in nature as something absolute-generically distinct from every variety of the expedient, and, in idea, opposed to it, though (as is commonly acknowledged) never, in the long run, disjoined from it in fact.
down through the ages, one of the strongest objections to the doctrine that utility or happiness is the criterion of right and wrong has been based on the idea of justice. the powerful sentiment and apparently clear thought that this word brings to mind, with a rapidity and certainty resembling an instinct, have seemed to the majority of thinkers to point to an inherent quality in things, to show that what is just must have an existence in nature as something absolute, fundamentally distinct from every variety of what is expedient. the concept of justice (they have thought) conflicts with the concept of expediency, though they commonly admit that in the long run justice and expediency go together as a matter of fact.

in the case of this, as of our other moral sentiments, there is no necessary connexion between the question of its origin, and that of its binding force. that a feeling is bestowed on us by nature, does not necessarily legitimate all its promptings. the feeling of justice might be a peculiar instinct, and might yet require, like our other instincts, to be controlled and enlightened by a higher reason. if we have intellectual instincts, leading us to judge in a particular way, as well as animal instincts that prompt us to act in a particular way, there is no necessity that the former should be more infallible in their sphere than the latter in theirs: it may as well happen that wrong judgments are occasionally suggested by those, as wrong actions by these. but though it is one thing to believe that we have natural feelings of justice, and another to acknowledge them as an ultimate criterion of conduct, these two opinions are very closely connected in point of fact. mankind are always predisposed to believe that any subjective feeling, not otherwise accounted for, is a revelation of some objective reality. our present object is to determine whether the reality, to which the feeling of justice corresponds, is one which needs any such special revelation; whether the justice or injustice of an action is a thing intrinsically peculiar, and distinct from all its other qualities, or only a combination of certain of those qualities, presented under a peculiar aspect. for the purpose of this inquiry, it is practically important to consider whether the feeling itself, of justice and injustice, is sui generis like our sensations of colour and taste, or a derivative feeling, formed by a combination of others. and this it is the more essential to examine, as people are in general willing enough to allow, that objectively the dictates of justice coincide with a part of the field of general expediency; but inasmuch as the subjective mental feeling of justice is different from that which commonly attaches to simple expediency, and, except in extreme cases of the latter, is far more imperative in its demands, people find it difficult to see, in justice, only a particular kind or branch of general utility, and think that its superior binding force requires a totally different origin.
in the case of this moral sentiment (as of all the others) there is no necessary connection between the question of its origin, and the question of its binding force. that a feeling is bestowed on us by nature doesn't necessarily mean that we should always do what it prompts us to do. the feeling of justice might be a special instinct (and thus bestowed by nature) and yet need to be controlled and enlightened by a higher reason, just as all our other instincts do. if we have intellectual instincts that lead us to think in a particular way, as well as animal instincts that prompt us to act in a particular way, the intellectual ones aren't necessarily more infallible in their sphere than the animal ones are in their sphere; just as wrong actions can be prompted by the animal instincts, wrong judgments may sometimes be prompted by the intellectual instincts. but although it is one thing to believe that we have natural feelings of justice and another to accept them as an ultimate criterion of conduct, these two opinions are very closely connected in point of fact. mankind are always inclined to think that any subjective feeling that they can't explain in any other way is a revelation of some objective reality. what we need to do now is to discover whether the reality to which the feeling of justice corresponds is one that needs to be revealed in any such special manner. that is, to discover whether the justice or injustice of an action is a special quality all on its own, and distinct from all the action's other qualities, or rather the justice or injustice of an action is only a combination of certain of those qualities seen or thought about in a special way. for the purpose of this inquiry it is practically important to consider whether the feeling of justice and injustice is sui generis not a special case of something more general like our sensations of colour and taste (such as something's tasting sweet), or rather the feeling of justice and injustice is a derivative feeling, formed by a combination of other feelings (comparable with something's tasting stale). it is especially important to look into this; here is why. (1) people are usually willing enough to agree that objectively out there in the world the dictates of justice coincide with a part of the field of general expediency, i.e. that very often the just action is also the action that will be most expedient from the point of view of people in general. (2) but the subjective mental feeling of justice is different from the feeling that commonly goes with simple expediency, and except in the extreme cases of expediency the feeling of justice is far more imperative in its demands. (3) so people find it hard to see justice as only a particular kind or branch of general utility, and they think that its greater binding force requires it to have a totally different origin.

to throw light upon this question, it is necessary to attempt to ascertain what is the distinguishing character of justice, or of injustice: what is the quality, or whether there is any quality, attributed in common to all modes of conduct designated as unjust (for justice, like many other moral attributes, is best defined by its opposite), and distinguishing them from such modes of conduct as are disapproved, but without having that particular epithet of disapprobation applied to them. if, in everything which men are accustomed to characterize as just or unjust, some one common attribute or collection of attributes is always present, we may judge whether this particular attribute or combination of attributes would be capable of gathering round it a sentiment of that peculiar character and intensity by virtue of the general laws of our emotional constitution, or whether the sentiment is inexplicable, and requires to be regarded as a special provision of nature. if we find the former to be the case, we shall, in resolving this question, have resolved also the main problem: if the latter, we shall have to seek for some other mode of investigating it.
to throw light on this question we must try to find out what it is that marks off justice, or injustice, as special. (i'll put this in terms of injustice because justice, like many other moral attributes, is best defined by its opposite.) when actions are described as unjust, is there some one quality that is being attributed to all of them, a quality that marks them off from actions that are disapproved of but aren't said to be unjust? if so, what quality is it? if some one common quality (or collection of qualities) is always present in everything that men customarily call just or unjust, we can judge whether the general laws of our emotional make-up could enable this particular quality (or combination of qualities) to summon up a sentiment with the special character and intensity of the sentiment of justice or injustice, or whether instead the sentiment of justice or injustice can't be explained, and must be regarded as something that nature provided independently of its other provisions. if we find the former to be the case, we shall by answering this question have also solved the main problem. if the latter is the case, we'll have to look for some other way of tackling the main problem.

thirdly, it is universally considered just that each person should obtain that (whether good or evil) which he deserves; and unjust that he should obtain a good, or be made to undergo an evil, which he does not deserve. this is, perhaps, the clearest and most emphatic form in which the idea of justice is conceived by the general mind. as it involves the notion of desert, the question arises, what constitutes desert? speaking in a general way, a person is understood to deserve good if he does right, evil if he does wrong; and in a more particular sense, to deserve good from those to whom he does or has done good, and evil from those to whom he does or has done evil. the precept of returning good for evil has never been regarded as a case of the fulfilment of justice, but as one in which the claims of justice are waived, in obedience to other considerations.
there can be unjust laws; so law is not the ultimate criterion of justice. a law may give one person a benefit, or impose harm on someone else, which justice condemns. but when a law is thought to be unjust, it seems always to be because it is thought to infringe somebody's right (just as when a breach of law is unjust). because it's a law that is thought to infringe the person's right, this can't be a legal right, so it is labelled differently and is called a moral right. so we can say that a second case of injustice consists in taking or keeping from a person something to which he has a moral right. (3) it is universally considered just that each person should get what he deserves (whether good or evil) and unjust that someone should obtain a good or be made to undergo an evil which he doesn't deserve. this is perhaps the clearest and most emphatic form in which the idea of justice is conceived by people in general. as it involves the notion of desert, the question arises, what constitutes desert? broadly speaking, a person is understood to deserve good if he does right, and to deserve evil if he does wrong; and in a more special sense, to deserve good from those to whom he does or has done good, and to deserve evil from those to whom he does or has done evil. the injunction return good for evil has never been regarded as a case of the fulfilment of justice, but as one in which the claims of justice are set aside in obedience to other considerations. (4) it is agreed to be unjust to break faith with anyone to fail to do something we have said or clearly implied that we would do, or disappoint expectations raised by our conduct, at least if we knew we were raising them and meant to do so. like the other obligations of justice i have already spoken of, this one isn't regarded as absolute. rather, it is thought of as capable of being overruled when there is a stronger obligation of justice on the other side, or when the other person has acted in a way that is deemed to clear us of our obligation to him and to constitute a forfeiture of the benefit that he has been led to expect. (5) everyone agrees that it is inconsistent with justice to be partial to show favour or preference to one person over another in matters to which favour and preference don't properly apply. but impartiality seems to be regarded not as a duty in itself but rather as a needed part of some other duty; for it is agreed that favour and preference are not always blameworthy, and indeed the cases where they are condemned are the exception rather than the rule. if a person could in some way favour his family or friends over strangers without violating any other duty, he would be blamed rather than applauded for not doing so. no-one thinks it unjust to choose one person in preference to another as a friend, a connection, or a companion. where rights are concerned, impartiality is of course obligatory, but this comes from the more general obligation to give everyone what he has a right to. for example, an arbitration court must be impartial because it is bound to set aside every other consideration and award a disputed item to the one of two parties who has the right to it. in some other cases impartiality means being solely influenced by desert; as with the administering of reward and punishments by judges, teachers or parents. in yet other cases impartiality means being solely influenced by concern for the public interest, as in making a selection among candidates for a government job. in short, impartiality considered as an obligation of justice can be said to mean being influenced only by the considerations that (it is supposed) ought to influence the matter in hand, and resisting the pull of any motives that prompt to conduct different from what those considerations would dictate.

fourthly, it is confessedly unjust to break faith with any one: to violate an engagement, either express or implied, or disappoint expectations raised by our own conduct, at least if we have raised those expectations knowingly and voluntarily. like the other obligations of justice already spoken of, this one is not regarded as absolute, but as capable of being overruled by a stronger obligation of justice on the other side; or by such conduct on the part of the person concerned as is deemed to absolve us from our obligation to him, and to constitute a forfeiture of the benefit which he has been led to expect. fifthly, it is, by universal admission, inconsistent with justice to be partial; to show favour or preference to one person over another, in matters to which favour and preference do not properly apply. impartiality, however, does not seem to be regarded as a duty in itself, but rather as instrumental to some other duty; for it is admitted that favour and preference are not always censurable, and indeed the cases in which they are condemned are rather the exception than the rule. a person would be more likely to be blamed than applauded for giving his family or friends no superiority in good offices over strangers, when he could do so without violating any other duty; and no one thinks it unjust to seek one person in preference to another as a friend, connexion, or companion. impartiality where rights are concerned is of course obligatory, but this is involved in the more general obligation of giving to every one his right. a tribunal, for example, must be impartial, because it is bound to award, without regard to any other consideration, a disputed object to the one of two parties who has the right to it. there are other cases in which impartiality means, being solely influenced by desert; as with those who, in the capacity of judges, preceptors, or parents, administer reward and punishment as such. there are cases, again, in which it means, being solely influenced by consideration for the public interest; as in making a selection among candidates for a government employment. impartiality, in short, as an obligation of justice, may be said to mean, being exclusively influenced by the considerations which it is supposed ought to influence the particular case in hand; and resisting the solicitation of any motives which prompt to conduct different from what those considerations would dictate.
a law may give one person a benefit, or impose harm on someone else, which justice condemns. but when a law is thought to be unjust, it seems always to be because it is thought to infringe somebody's right (just as when a breach of law is unjust). because it's a law that is thought to infringe the person's right, this can't be a legal right, so it is labelled differently and is called a moral right. so we can say that a second case of injustice consists in taking or keeping from a person something to which he has a moral right. (3) it is universally considered just that each person should get what he deserves (whether good or evil) and unjust that someone should obtain a good or be made to undergo an evil which he doesn't deserve. this is perhaps the clearest and most emphatic form in which the idea of justice is conceived by people in general. as it involves the notion of desert, the question arises, what constitutes desert? broadly speaking, a person is understood to deserve good if he does right, and to deserve evil if he does wrong; and in a more special sense, to deserve good from those to whom he does or has done good, and to deserve evil from those to whom he does or has done evil. the injunction return good for evil has never been regarded as a case of the fulfilment of justice, but as one in which the claims of justice are set aside in obedience to other considerations. (4) it is agreed to be unjust to break faith with anyone to fail to do something we have said or clearly implied that we would do, or disappoint expectations raised by our conduct, at least if we knew we were raising them and meant to do so. like the other obligations of justice i have already spoken of, this one isn't regarded as absolute. rather, it is thought of as capable of being overruled when there is a stronger obligation of justice on the other side, or when the other person has acted in a way that is deemed to clear us of our obligation to him and to constitute a forfeiture of the benefit that he has been led to expect. (5) everyone agrees that it is inconsistent with justice to be partial to show favour or preference to one person over another in matters to which favour and preference don't properly apply. but impartiality seems to be regarded not as a duty in itself but rather as a needed part of some other duty; for it is agreed that favour and preference are not always blameworthy, and indeed the cases where they are condemned are the exception rather than the rule. if a person could in some way favour his family or friends over strangers without violating any other duty, he would be blamed rather than applauded for not doing so. no-one thinks it unjust to choose one person in preference to another as a friend, a connection, or a companion. where rights are concerned, impartiality is of course obligatory, but this comes from the more general obligation to give everyone what he has a right to. for example, an arbitration court must be impartial because it is bound to set aside every other consideration and award a disputed item to the one of two parties who has the right to it. in some other cases impartiality means being solely influenced by desert; as with the administering of reward and punishments by judges, teachers or parents. in yet other cases impartiality means being solely influenced by concern for the public interest, as in making a selection among candidates for a government job. in short, impartiality considered as an obligation of justice can be said to mean being influenced only by the considerations that (it is supposed) ought to influence the matter in hand, and resisting the pull of any motives that prompt to conduct different from what those considerations would dictate.

nearly allied to the idea of impartiality, is that of equality; which often enters as a component part both into the conception of justice and into the practice of it, and, in the eyes of many persons, constitutes its essence. but in this, still more than in any other case, the notion of justice varies in different persons, and always conforms in its variations to their notion of utility. each person maintains that equality is the dictate of justice, except where he thinks that expediency requires inequality. the justice of giving equal protection to the rights of all, is maintained by those who support the most outrageous inequality in the rights themselves. even in slave countries it is theoretically admitted that the rights of the slave, such as they are, ought to be as sacred as those of the master; and that a tribunal which fails to enforce them with equal strictness is wanting in justice; while, at the same time, institutions which leave to the slave scarcely any rights to enforce, are not deemed unjust, because they are not deemed inexpedient. those who think that utility requires distinctions of rank, do not consider it unjust that riches and social privileges should be unequally dispensed; but those who think this inequality inexpedient, think it unjust also. whoever thinks that government is necessary, sees no injustice in as much inequality as is constituted by giving to the magistrate powers not granted to other people. even among those who hold levelling doctrines, there are as many questions of justice as there are differences of opinion about expediency. some communists consider it unjust that the produce of the labour of the community should be shared on any other principle than that of exact equality; others think it just that those should receive most whose needs are greatest; while others hold that those who work harder, or who produce more, or whose services are more valuable to the community, may justly claim a larger quota in the division of the produce. and the sense of natural justice may be plausibly appealed to in behalf of every one of these opinions.
closely allied to the idea of impartiality is that of equality, which often plays a part in one's thought of justice and in the performance of just actions. many people think it is the essence of justice. but in this context, even more than in any of the others, the notion of justice varies in different persons, with the variations conforming to their different notions of utility, i.e. of what is expedient. each person maintains that equality is demanded by justice except where he thinks that expediency requires inequality. the justice of giving equal protection everyone's rights is maintained by those who support the most outrageous inequality in what rights people have. even in slave countries it is theoretically admitted that the rights of the slave, such as they are, ought to be as sacred as those of the master; and that a court that fails to enforce them with equal strictness is lacking in justice; while at the same time social arrangements that leave to the slave scarcely any rights to enforce are not thought unjust because they are not thought to be inexpedient. those who think that utility requires distinctions of rank don't think it unjust that riches and social privileges should be distributed unequally; but those who think this inequality to be inexpedient think it unjust also. whoever thinks that government is necessary sees no injustice in whatever inequality is involved in giving to the magistrate powers not granted to other people. even among those who hold doctrines that advocate abolishing all social distinctions, there are as many questions of justice as there are differences of opinion about expediency. some communists consider it unjust to share out the products of the community's work in any way except exactly equally; others think it just that those whose wants are greatest should receive most; while others hold that those who work harder or who produce more or whose services are more valuable to the community can justly claim a larger share in the division of the products. and every one of these opinions can plausibly be backed by the sense of natural justice.

among so many diverse applications of the term justice, which yet is not regarded as ambiguous, it is a matter of some difficulty to seize the mental link which holds them together, and on which the moral sentiment adhering to the term essentially depends. perhaps, in this embarrassment, some help may be derived from the history of the word, as indicated by its etymology.
among so many different uses of the term justice (not regarded as an ambiguous word!), it is a little difficult to get hold of the mental link which holds them together and on which the moral sentiment associated with the term essentially depends. perhaps we may get some help with this puzzle from the history of the word, as indicated by its etymology.

and droit became restricted in their meaning to positive law, although much which is not required by law is equally necessary to moral straightness or rectitude, is as significant of the original character of moral ideas as if the derivation had been the reverse way. the courts of justice, the administration of justice, are the courts and the administration of law. la justice, in french, is the established term for judicature. there can, i think, be no doubt that the idee mere, the primitive element, in the formation of the notion of justice, was conformity to law. it constituted the entire idea among the hebrews, up to the birth of christianity; as might be expected in the case of a people whose laws attempted to embrace all subjects on which precepts were required, and who believed those laws to be a direct emanation from the supreme being. but other nations, and in particular the greeks and romans, who knew that their laws had been made originally, and still continued to be made, by men, were not afraid to admit that those men might make bad laws; might do, by law, the same things, and from the same motives, which, if done by individuals without the sanction of law, would be called unjust. and hence the sentiment of injustice came to be attached, not to all violations of law, but only to violations of such laws as ought to exist, including such as ought to exist but do not; and to laws themselves, if supposed to be contrary to what ought to be law. in this manner the idea of law and of its injunctions was still predominant in the notion of justice, even when the laws actually in force ceased to be accepted as the standard of it. it is true that mankind consider the idea of justice and its obligations as applicable to many things which neither are, nor is it desired that they should be, regulated by law. nobody desires that laws should interfere with the whole detail of private life; yet every one allows that in all daily conduct a person may and does show himself to be either just or unjust. but even here, the idea of the breach of what ought to be law, still lingers in a modified shape. it would always give us pleasure, and chime in with our feelings of fitness, that acts which we deem unjust should be punished, though we do not always think it expedient that this should be done by the tribunals. we forego that gratification on account of incidental inconveniences. we should be glad to see just conduct enforced and injustice repressed, even in the minutest details, if we were not, with reason, afraid of trusting the magistrate with so unlimited an amount of power over individuals. when we think that a person is bound in justice to do a thing, it is an ordinary form of language to say, that he ought to be compelled to do it. we should be gratified to see the obligation enforced by anybody who had the power. if we see that its enforcement by law would be inexpedient, we lament the impossibility, we consider the impunity given to injustice as an evil, and strive to make amends for it by bringing a strong expression of our own and the public disapprobation to bear upon the offender. thus the idea of legal constraint is still the generating idea of the notion of justice, though undergoing several transformations before that notion, as it exists in an advanced state of society, becomes complete.
it's true that mankind consider the idea of justice and its obligations as applicable to many things that aren't and that nobody thinks should be regulated by law. nobody wants laws to interfere with all the details of private life, yet everyone agrees that in all daily conduct a person may and does show himself to be either just or unjust. but even here the idea of the breach of what ought to be law still lingers in a modified form. it would always give us pleasure, and would chime in with our feelings about what is fit or appropriate or suitable, if acts that we think unjust were punished, though we don't always think it expedient that this should be done by the courts. we forgo that gratification because of inconveniences that it would bring. we would be glad to see just conduct enforced and injustice repressed, even in the smallest details of our lives, if we weren't rightly afraid of trusting the officers of the law with such unlimited power over individuals. when we think that a person is bound in justice to do a thing, it is an ordinary use of language to say he ought to be made to do it. we would be gratified to see the obligation enforced by anybody who had the power to enforce it. if we see that it would be inexpedient for it to be enforced by law, we regret that it can't be enforced by law, consider it bad that the person can get away with it, and try to make amends for this by subjecting the offender to a strong expression of our own and the public's disapproval.

it is true that mankind consider the idea of justice and its obligations as applicable to many things which neither are, nor is it desired that they should be, regulated by law. nobody desires that laws should interfere with the whole detail of private life; yet every one allows that in all daily conduct a person may and does show himself to be either just or unjust. but even here, the idea of the breach of what ought to be law, still lingers in a modified shape. it would always give us pleasure, and chime in with our feelings of fitness, that acts which we deem unjust should be punished, though we do not always think it expedient that this should be done by the tribunals. we forego that gratification on account of incidental inconveniences. we should be glad to see just conduct enforced and injustice repressed, even in the minutest details, if we were not, with reason, afraid of trusting the magistrate with so unlimited an amount of power over individuals. when we think that a person is bound in justice to do a thing, it is an ordinary form of language to say, that he ought to be compelled to do it. we should be gratified to see the obligation enforced by anybody who had the power. if we see that its enforcement by law would be inexpedient, we lament the impossibility, we consider the impunity given to injustice as an evil, and strive to make amends for it by bringing a strong expression of our own and the public disapprobation to bear upon the offender. thus the idea of legal constraint is still the generating idea of the notion of justice, though undergoing several transformations before that notion, as it exists in an advanced state of society, becomes complete.
thus the idea of legal constraint is still the generating idea of the notion of justice, though it goes through several changes before emerging as the notion of justice that exists in an advanced state of society.

the above is, i think, a true account, as far as it goes, of the origin and progressive growth of the idea of justice. but we must observe, that it contains, as yet, nothing to distinguish that obligation from moral obligation in general. for the truth is, that the idea of penal sanction, which is the essence of law, enters not only into the conception of injustice, but into that of any kind of wrong. we do not call anything wrong, unless we mean to imply that a person ought to be punished in some way or other for doing it; if not by law, by the opinion of his fellow creatures; if not by opinion, by the reproaches of his own conscience. this seems the real turning point of the distinction between morality and simple expediency. it is a part of the notion of duty in every one of its forms, that a person may rightfully be compelled to fulfil it. duty is a thing which may be exacted from a person, as one exacts a debt. unless we think that it might be exacted from him, we do not call it his duty. reasons of prudence, or the interest of other people, may militate against actually exacting it; but the person himself, it is clearly understood, would not be entitled to complain. there are other things, on the contrary, which we wish that people should do, which we like or admire them for doing, perhaps dislike or despise them for not doing, but yet admit that they are not bound to do; it is not a case of moral obligation; we do not blame them, that is, we do not think that they are proper objects of punishment. how we come by these ideas of deserving and not deserving punishment, will appear, perhaps, in the sequel; but i think there is no doubt that this distinction lies at the bottom of the notions of right and wrong; that we call any conduct wrong, or employ instead, some other term of dislike or disparagement, according as we think that the person ought, or ought not, to be punished for it; and we say that it would be right to do so and so, or merely that it would be desirable or laudable, according as we would wish to see the person whom it concerns, compelled or only persuaded and exhorted, to act in that manner.
i think that the above is a true account, as far as it goes, of the origin and development of the idea of justice. but it doesn't yet contain anything to distinguish that obligation from moral obligation in general. for the truth is that the idea of penal sanction, which is the essence of law, enters not only into the conception of injustice but into the conception of any kind of wrong. whenever we call something wrong we mean to imply that a person ought to be punished somehow for doing it; if not by law, by the opinion of his fellow-creatures; if not by opinion, by the reproaches of his own conscience. this relation to the idea of enforcement by law seems to be the real turning point of the distinction between morality and simple expediency. it is a part of the notion of duty in every one of its forms that a person may rightfully be compelled to do his duty, just as he may rightfully be compelled to pay a debt. if we don't think it would be all right to make a person do a certain thing, we don't call it his duty. there may be reasons of prudence, or of the interests of other people, that count against actually using compulsion, but we clearly understand that the person himself would not be entitled to complain if he were compelled. in contrast with this, there are other things that we wish people would do, like or admire them for doing, perhaps dislike or despise them for not doing, but yet admit that they are not bound to do. it is not a case of moral obligation; we don't blame them, i.e. we don't think that they are proper objects of punishment. it may become clear later on how we get these ideas of deserving and not deserving punishment; but i don't think there is any room for doubt that this distinction lies at the bottom of the notions of right and wrong; that whether we call a bit of conduct wrong rather than using some other term of dislike or discredit depends on whether we think that the person ought to be punished for it; and whether we say it would be right for a person to do such-and-such rather than merely that it would be desirable or praiseworthy for him to do so depends on whether we would like to see the person compelled to act in that manner rather than merely persuaded and urged to do so.

this, therefore, being the characteristic difference which marks off, not justice, but morality in general, from the remaining provinces of expediency and worthiness; the character is still to be sought which distinguishes justice from other branches of morality. now it is known that ethical writers divide moral duties into two classes, denoted by the ill-chosen expressions, duties of perfect and of imperfect obligation; the latter being those in which, though the act is obligatory, the particular occasions of performing it are left to our choice; as in the case of charity or beneficence, which we are indeed bound to practise, but not towards any definite person, nor at any prescribed time. in the more precise language of philosophic jurists, duties of perfect obligation are those duties in virtue of which a correlative right resides in some person or persons; duties of imperfect obligation are those moral obligations which do not give birth to any right. i think it will be found that this distinction exactly coincides with that which exists between justice and the other obligations of morality. in our survey of the various popular acceptations of justice, the term appeared generally to involve the idea of a personal right a claim on the part of one or more individuals, like that which the law gives when it confers a proprietary or other legal right. whether the injustice consists in depriving a person of a possession, or in breaking faith with him, or in treating him worse than he deserves, or worse than other people who have no greater claims, in each case the supposition implies two things a wrong done, and some assignable person who is wronged. injustice may also be done by treating a person better than others; but the wrong in this case is to his competitors, who are also assignable persons. it seems to me that this feature in the case a right in some person, correlative to the moral obligation constitutes the specific difference between justice, and generosity or beneficence. justice implies something which it is not only right to do, and wrong not to do, but which some individual person can claim from us as his moral right. no one has a moral right to our generosity or beneficence, because we are not morally bound to practise those virtues towards any given individual. and it will be found, with respect to this as with respect to every correct definition, that the instances which seem to conflict with it are those which most confirm it. for if a moralist attempts, as some have done, to make out that mankind generally, though not any given individual, have a right to all the good we can do them, he at once, by that thesis, includes generosity and beneficence within the category of justice. he is obliged to say, that our utmost exertions are due to our fellow creatures, thus assimilating them to a debt; or that nothing less can be a sufficient return for what society does for us, thus classing the case as one of gratitude; both of which are acknowledged cases of justice. wherever there is a right, the case is one of justice, and not of the virtue of beneficence: and whoever does not place the distinction between justice and morality in general where we have now placed it, will be found to make no distinction between them at all, but to merge all morality in justice.
so the notion of fitness to be punished is the characteristic difference that marks off (not justice, but) morality in general from the remaining provinces of expediency and worthiness; so we are still looking for the characteristic that distinguishes justice from other branches of morality. now it is known that ethical writers divide moral duties into two classes, to which they give the ill-chosen labels duties of perfect obligation and duties of imperfect obligation. the latter are duties in which, though the act is obligatory, the particular occasions of performing it are left to our choice. for example, we are bound to engage in acts of charity or beneficence, but we aren't bound to perform them towards any definite person or at any prescribed time. in the more precise language of legal theorists, duties of perfect obligation are the ones that create a correlative right in some person or persons; duties of imperfect obligation are the moral obligations that don't give rise to any right. i think it will be found that this distinction exactly coincides with the distinction between justice and the other obligations of morality. in my survey here of the various common ideas about justice, the term seemed generally to involve the idea of a personal right a claim on the part of one or more individuals, like what the law gives when it confers an ownership or other legal right. whether the injustice consists in (1) and (2) depriving a person of something he owns, or in (4) breaking faith with him, or in (3) treating him worse than he deserves or (5) worse than other people who have no greater claims, in each case the supposition implies two things a wrong done, and some definite person who is wronged. injustice may also be done by treating a person better than others, but in that case some other definite people, his competitors, are wronged. it seems to me that this feature in the case some person's having a right correlated with the moral obligation constitutes the defining difference that separates justice from generosity or beneficence. justice implies something which it is not only right to do, and wrong not to do, but which some individual person can claim from us as his moral right. no-one has a moral right to our generosity or beneficence, because we are not morally bound to practise those virtues towards any given individual. it will be found with this as with every correct definition that the particular cases that seem to conflict with it are those that most confirm it. some moralists have tried to argue that although no given individual has a right to our beneficence, mankind in general does have a right to all the good we can do them. someone who maintains that automatically includes generosity and beneficence within the category of justice. he is obliged to say that we owe our utmost exertions to our fellow creatures, thus assimilating those exertions to a debt; or that nothing less than our utmost exertions can be an adequate return for what society does for us, thus classifying the case as one of gratitude, both of which are acknowledged cases of justice. wherever there is a right, the case is one of justice and not of the virtue of beneficence. if you don't draw the general line between justice and morality where i have drawn it, you'll turn out to be drawing no line between them and to be merging all morality in justice.

having thus endeavoured to determine the distinctive elements which enter into the composition of the idea of justice, we are ready to enter on the inquiry, whether the feeling, which accompanies the idea, is attached to it by a special dispensation of nature, or whether it could have grown up, by any known laws, out of the idea itself; and in particular, whether it can have originated in considerations of general expediency.
now that we have tried to discover the distinctive elements that make up the idea of justice, we are ready to start looking for the right answer to these questions: is the feeling that accompanies the idea of justice attached to it by a special provision of nature? could that feeling have grown out of the idea itself, in accordance with some known laws about human nature? if the answer to the second question is yes, then a more particular question arises: could the feeling have originated in considerations of general expediency?

i conceive that the sentiment itself does not arise from anything which would commonly, or correctly, be termed an idea of expediency; but that, though the sentiment does not, whatever is moral in it does.
although the sentiment itself doesn't arise from anything that would or should be termed an idea of expediency, whatever is moral in it does.

we have seen that the two essential ingredients in the sentiment of justice are, the desire to punish a person who has done harm, and the knowledge or belief that there is some definite individual or individuals to whom harm has been done.
we have seen that the two essential ingredients in the sentiment of justice are the desire to punish a person who has done harm, and the knowledge or belief that there is some definite individual or individuals to whom harm has been done.

now it appears to me, that the desire to punish a person who has done harm to some individual, is a spontaneous outgrowth from two sentiments, both in the highest degree natural, and which either are or resemble instincts; the impulse of self-defence, and the feeling of sympathy.
now it appears to me that the desire to punish a person who has done harm to some individual is a spontaneous outgrowth from two sentiments that are both utterly natural, and that either are instincts or resemble instincts. they are the impulse of self-defence, and the feeling of sympathy.

it is natural to resent, and to repel or retaliate, any harm done or attempted against ourselves, or against those with whom we sympathize. the origin of this sentiment it is not necessary here to discuss. whether it be an instinct or a result of intelligence, it is, we know, common to all animal nature; for every animal tries to hurt those who have hurt, or who it thinks are about to hurt, itself or its young. human beings, on this point, only differ from other animals in two particulars. first, in being capable of sympathizing, not solely with their offspring, or, like some of the more noble animals, with some superior animal who is kind to them, but with all human, and even with all sentient beings. secondly, in having a more developed intelligence, which gives a wider range to the whole of their sentiments, whether self-regarding or sympathetic. by virtue of his superior intelligence, even apart from his superior range of sympathy, a human being is capable of apprehending a community of interest between himself and the human society of which he forms a part, such that any conduct which threatens the security of the society generally, is threatening to his own, and calls forth his instinct (if instinct it be) of self-defence. the same superiority of intelligence, joined to the power of sympathizing with human beings generally, enables him to attach himself to the collective idea of his tribe, his country, or mankind, in such a manner that any act hurtful to them rouses his instinct of sympathy, and urges him to resistance.
it is natural to resent, and to repel or retaliate for, any harm done or attempted against ourselves or against those with whom we sympathise. we needn't discuss the origin of this sentiment here. whether it is an instinct or a result of intelligence, we know that it is common to all animal nature; for every animal tries to hurt those who have hurt it or its young, or who it thinks are about to do so. in this matter human beings differ from other animals in only two respects. (1) they are capable of sympathising not only with their offspring, or (like some of the more noble animals) with some superior animal who is kind to them, but with all human beings even with all sentient beings. (2) they have a more developed intelligence, which gives a wider range to the whole of their sentiments, whether self-regarding or sympathetic. by virtue of his superior intelligence, even apart from his greater range of sympathy, a human being can understand the idea of a community of interest between himself and the human society of which he forms a part, so that any conduct that threatens the security of the society generally is threatening to his own security in particular, and calls forth his instinct (if that's what it is) of self-defence. with that superiority of intelligence joined to the power of sympathising with human beings generally, the human being can take on board the collective idea of his tribe, his country, or mankind, in such a way that any act hurtful to them arouses his instinct of sympathy and urges him to resist.

the sentiment of justice, in that one of its elements which consists of the desire to punish, is thus, i conceive, the natural feeling of retaliation or vengeance, rendered by intellect and sympathy applicable to those injuries, that is, to those hurts, which wound us through, or in common with, society at large. this sentiment, in itself, has nothing moral in it; what is moral is, the exclusive subordination of it to the social sympathies, so as to wait on and obey their call. for the natural feeling tends to make us resent indiscriminately whatever any one does that is disagreeable to us; but when moralized by the social feeling, it only acts in the directions conformable to the general good; just persons resenting a hurt to society, though not otherwise a hurt to themselves, and not resenting a hurt to themselves, however painful, unless it be of the kind which society has a common interest with them in the repression of.
one element in the sentiment of justice is the desire to punish. that, i think, is the natural feeling of retaliation or vengeance processed by intellect and sympathy so that it applies to the injuries that wound us by wounding society at large. this sentiment in itself has nothing moral in it; what is moral is its being pure purely at the service of the social sympathies, so that it is aroused only when they call it up. for the natural feeling would make us resent indiscriminately whatever anyone does that is disagreeable to us; but when it is made moral by the social feeling, it acts only in ways that conform to the general good. a just person resents a hurt to society even if it isn't directly a hurt to him, and he doesn't resent a hurt to himself, however painful, unless it is a kind of hurt that society, as well as he himself, would want to prevent.

it is no objection against this doctrine to say, that when we feel our sentiment of justice outraged, we are not thinking of society at large, or of any collective interest, but only of the individual case. it is common enough certainly, though the reverse of commendable, to feel resentment merely because we have suffered pain; but a person whose resentment is really a moral feeling, that is, who considers whether an act is blameable before he allows himself to resent it such a person, though he may not say expressly to himself that he is standing up for the interest of society, certainly does feel that he is asserting a rule which is for the benefit of others as well as for his own. if he is not feeling this if he is regarding the act solely as it affects him individually he is not consciously just; he is not concerning himself about the justice of his actions. this is admitted even by anti-utilitarian moralists. when kant (as before remarked) propounds as the fundamental principle of morals, so act, that thy rule of conduct might be adopted as a law by all rational beings, he virtually acknowledges that the interest of mankind collectively, or at least of mankind indiscriminately, must be in the mind of the agent when conscientiously deciding on the morality of the act. otherwise he uses words without a meaning: for, that a rule even of utter selfishness could not possibly be adopted by all rational beings that there is any insuperable obstacle in the nature of things to its adoption cannot be even plausibly maintained. to give any meaning to kant's principle, the sense put upon it must be, that we ought to shape our conduct by a rule which all rational beings might adopt with benefit to their collective interest.
you might want to object against this doctrine: when we feel our sentiment of justice outraged, we aren't thinking of society at large or of any collective interest, but only of the individual case. well, it is certainly common enough though the reverse of commendable for someone to feel resentment merely because he has suffered pain; but a person whose resentment is really a moral feeling, i.e. who considers whether an act is blamable before he allows himself to resent it, though he may not explicitly say to himself that he is standing up for the interests of society, certainly does feel that he is asserting a rule that is for the benefit of others as well as for his own benefit. if he is not feeling this if he is regarding the act solely as it affects him individually he is not consciously just; he is not concerning himself about the justice of his actions. this is admitted even by anti-utilitarian moralists. when kant (as i remarked here) propounds as the fundamental principle of morals act in such a way that the rule on which you act could be adopted as a law by all rational beings, he virtually acknowledges that the interest of mankind. must be in the person's mind when he is conscientiously deciding on the morality of the act. if that isn't what kant is getting at, he is using words without a meaning: for he couldn't plausibly mean that a rule even of utter selfishness couldn't possibly be adopted by all rational beings, that there is some insuperable obstacle in the nature of things to its adoption. to give any meaning to kant's principle we must take it to be saying that we ought to shape our conduct by a rule that all rational beings might adopt with benefit to their collective interest.

to recapitulate: the idea of justice supposes two things; a rule of conduct, and a sentiment which sanctions the rule. the first must be supposed common to all mankind, and intended for their good. the other (the sentiment) is a desire that punishment may be suffered by those who infringe the rule. there is involved, in addition, the conception of some definite person who suffers by the infringement; whose rights (to use the expression appropriated to the case) are violated by it. and the sentiment of justice appears to me to be, the animal desire to repel or retaliate a hurt or damage to oneself, or to those with whom one sympathizes, widened so as to include all persons, by the human capacity of enlarged sympathy, and the human conception of intelligent self-interest. from the latter elements, the feeling derives its morality; from the former, its peculiar impressiveness, and energy of self-assertion.
to recapitulate: the idea of justice involves two things: a rule of conduct, and a sentiment that sanctions the rule. the rule must be supposed to be common to all mankind, and intended for their good. the sentiment is a desire that punishment may be suffered by those who infringe the rule. a third thing is also involved, namely the thought of some definite person who suffers by the infringement someone whose rights. are violated by it. and the sentiment of justice appears to me to be: (1) the animal desire to repel or retaliate for a hurt or damage to oneself or to those with whom one sympathises, widened so as to include all persons with the widening brought about by (2) the human capacity for broadened sympathy and the human conception of intelligent self-interest. the feeling gets its status as moral from (2), and its unique impressiveness and psychological force from (1).

i have, throughout, treated the idea of a right residing in the injured person, and violated by the injury, not as a separate element in the composition of the idea and sentiment, but as one of the forms in which the other two elements clothe themselves. these elements are, a hurt to some assignable person or persons on the one hand, and a demand for punishment on the other. an examination of our own minds, i think, will show, that these two things include all that we mean when we speak of violation of a right. when we call anything a person's right, we mean that he has a valid claim on society to protect him in the possession of it, either by the force of law, or by that of education and opinion. if he has what we consider a sufficient claim, on whatever account, to have something guaranteed to him by society, we say that he has a right to it. if we desire to prove that anything does not belong to him by right, we think this done as soon as it is admitted that society ought not to take measures for securing it to him, but should leave it to chance, or to his own exertions. thus, a person is said to have a right to what he can earn in fair professional competition; because society ought not to allow any other person to hinder him from endeavouring to earn in that manner as much as he can. but he has not a right to three hundred a-year, though he may happen to be earning it; because society is not called on to provide that he shall earn that sum. on the contrary, if he owns ten thousand pounds three per cent. stock, he has
i have treated the idea of a right that the injured person has, and that the injury violates, not as a separate element in the make-up of the idea and the sentiment but as one of the forms in which the other two elements clothe themselves. these elements are a hurt to some assignable person or persons, and a demand for punishment. an examination of our own minds, i think, will show that these two include the whole of what we mean when we speak of violation of a right. when we call something a person's right, we mean that he has a valid claim on society to protect him in his possession of it, either by the force of law or by the force of education and opinion. if we think he has a strong enough claim, on whatever basis, to have something guaranteed to him by society, we say that he has a right to it. if we want to prove that something does not belong to him by right, we think we have done that as soon as it is admitted that society ought not to take measures for guaranteeing that he keeps it but should leave that to chance or to his own efforts. thus, a person is said to have a right to what he can earn in fair professional competition, because society ought not to allow anyone else to hinder him from trying to earn as much as he can in that manner. but he doesn't have a right to three hundred pounds a year, even if that is what he happens to be earning; because society is not called on to ensure that he will earn that sum. on the other hand, if he owns ten thousand pounds worth of government bonds at three per cent, he has a right to three hundred pounds a year because society has come under an obligation to provide him with an income of that amount.

a right to three hundred a-year; because society has come under an obligation to provide him with an income of that amount.
an examination of our own minds, i think, will show that these two include the whole of what we mean when we speak of violation of a right. when we call something a person's right, we mean that he has a valid claim on society to protect him in his possession of it, either by the force of law or by the force of education and opinion. if we think he has a strong enough claim, on whatever basis, to have something guaranteed to him by society, we say that he has a right to it. if we want to prove that something does not belong to him by right, we think we have done that as soon as it is admitted that society ought not to take measures for guaranteeing that he keeps it but should leave that to chance or to his own efforts. thus, a person is said to have a right to what he can earn in fair professional competition, because society ought not to allow anyone else to hinder him from trying to earn as much as he can in that manner. but he doesn't have a right to three hundred pounds a year, even if that is what he happens to be earning; because society is not called on to ensure that he will earn that sum. on the other hand, if he owns ten thousand pounds worth of government bonds at three per cent, he has a right to three hundred pounds a year because society has come under an obligation to provide him with an income of that amount.

to have a right, then, is, i conceive, to have something which society ought to defend me in the possession of. if the objector goes on to ask why it ought, i can give him no other reason than general utility. if that expression does not seem to convey a sufficient feeling of the strength of the obligation, nor to account for the peculiar energy of the feeling, it is because there goes to the composition of the sentiment, not a rational only but also an animal element, the thirst for retaliation; and this thirst derives its intensity, as well as its moral justification, from the extraordinarily important and impressive kind of utility which is concerned. the interest involved is that of security, to every one's feelings the most vital of all interests. nearly all other earthly benefits are needed by one person, not needed by another; and many of them can, if necessary, be cheerfully foregone, or replaced by something else; but security no human being can possibly do without; on it we depend for all our immunity from evil, and for the whole value of all and every good, beyond the passing moment; since nothing but the gratification of the instant could be of any worth to us, if we could be deprived of everything the next instant by whoever was momentarily stronger than ourselves. now this most indispensable of all necessaries, after physical nutriment, cannot be had, unless the machinery for providing it is kept unintermittedly in active play. our notion, therefore, of the claim we have on our fellow creatures to join in making safe for us the very groundwork of our existence, gathers feelings round it so much more intense than those concerned in any of the more common cases of utility, that the difference in degree (as is often the case in psychology) becomes a real difference in kind. the claim assumes that character of absoluteness, that apparent infinity, and incommensurability with all other considerations, which constitute the distinction between the feeling of right and wrong and that of ordinary expediency and inexpediency. the feelings concerned are so powerful, and we count so positively on finding a responsive feeling in others (all being alike interested), that ought and should grow into must, and recognized indispensability becomes a moral necessity, analogous to physical, and often not inferior to it in binding force.
as i see it, then, for me to have a right is for me to have something that society ought to defend me in the possession of. why ought it to do so? the only reason i can give is general utility. if that phrase doesn't seem to convey a good enough sense of how strong the obligation is i.e. good enough to account for the special energy of the feeling that's because the make-up of the sentiment includes not only a rational element but also an animal element, the thirst for retaliation; and this thirst gets its intensity as well as its moral justification from the extraordinarily important and impressive kind of utility that is concerned. the general interest that is involved is that of security, which everyone feels to be the most vital of all interests. all other earthly benefits are needed by this person and not by that, and many of them can if necessary be cheerfully done without or replaced by something else; but no human being can possibly do without security. we depend on it for all our immunity from evil. and we depend on it for the whole value of every single good that goes beyond the passing moment; because if we could be deprived of anything the next instant by whoever was at that moment stronger than ourselves, nothing could be of any worth to us except the gratification of the instant. second only to food and drink, security is the most indispensable of all the requirements of life; and it can't be had unless the machinery for providing it is kept running continuously. that's why our notion of the claim we have on our fellow-creatures to join in making safe for us the very groundwork of our existence gathers feelings around it that are much more intense than those concerned in any of the more ordinary kinds of utility. they are so much more intense that this difference in degree (as is often the case in psychology) becomes a real difference in kind. the claim takes on the absoluteness, the apparent infinity that won't let it be weighed against other considerations, which distinguish the feeling of right and wrong from that of ordinary expediency and inexpediency. the feelings concerned are so powerful, and we rely so absolutely on finding a responsive feeling in others (because the interests of everyone are involved) that ought and should grow into must, and recognised indispensability becomes moral necessity, analogous to physical necessity and often as strongly binding a force as physical necessity is.

if the preceding analysis, or something resembling it, be not the correct account of the notion of justice; if justice be totally independent of utility, and be a standard per se, which the mind can recognize by simple introspection of itself; it is hard to understand why that internal oracle is so ambiguous, and why so many things appear either just or unjust, according to the light in which they are regarded. we are continually informed that utility is an uncertain standard, which every different person interprets differently, and that there is no safety but in the immutable, ineffaceable, and unmistakeable dictates of justice, which carry their evidence in themselves, and are independent of the fluctuations of opinion. one would suppose from this that on questions of justice there could be no controversy; that if we take that for our rule, its application to any given case could leave us in as little doubt as a mathematical demonstration. so far is this from being the fact, that there is as much difference of opinion, and as fierce discussion, about what is just, as about what is useful to society. not only have different nations and individuals different notions of justice, but, in the mind of one and the same individual, justice is not some one rule, principle, or maxim, but many, which do not always coincide in their dictates, and in choosing between which, he is guided either by some extraneous standard, or by his own personal predilections.
if that analysis or something like it is not the correct account of the notion of justice, if justice is totally independent of utility and is an independently existing standard that the mind can recognise by simply looking into itself, it's hard to understand why that internal oracle is so ambiguous, and why so many things appear just or unjust depending on the light in which they are looked at. we are continually being told that utility is an uncertain standard which every different person interprets differently, and that there is no safety but in the unchangeable, unerasable, unmistakable dictates of justice, which are selfevident and independent of the fluctuations of opinion. this would make one think that there could be no controversy on questions of justice; that if we take that for our rule the supposedly unmistakable dictate of justice the question of how to apply it to any given case could be answered with as much certainty as if it had been proved by a mathematical demonstration. this is so far from being the case that there is as much disagreement and discussion about what is just as about what is useful to society. it's not just that different nations and different individuals have different notions of justice; in the mind of one and the same individual justice isn't some one rule, principle or maxim, but many, which don't always coincide in their dictates and which the individual chooses between on the basis of some extraneous standard or of his own personal inclinations. punishment

for instance, there are some who say, that it is unjust to punish any one for the sake of example to others; that punishment is just, only when intended for the good of the sufferer himself. others maintain the extreme reverse, contending that to punish persons who have attained years of discretion, for their own benefit, is despotism and injustice, since if the matter at issue is solely their own good, no one has a right to control their own judgment of it; but that they may justly be punished to prevent evil to others, this being an exercise of the legitimate right of self-defence. mr. owen, again, affirms that it is unjust to punish at all; for the criminal did not make his own character; his education, and the circumstances which surround him, have made him a criminal, and for these he is not responsible. all these opinions are extremely plausible; and so long as the question is argued as one of justice simply, without going down to the principles which lie under justice and are the source of its authority, i am unable to see how any of these reasoners can be refuted. for, in truth, every one of the three builds upon rules of justice confessedly true. the first appeals to the acknowledged injustice of singling out an individual, and making him a sacrifice, without his consent, for other people's benefit. the second relies on the acknowledged justice of self-defence, and the admitted injustice of forcing one person to conform to another's notions of what constitutes his good. the owenite invokes the admitted principle, that it is unjust to punish any one for what he cannot help. each is triumphant so long as he is not compelled to take into consideration any other maxims of justice than the one he has selected; but as soon as their several maxims are brought face to face, each disputant seems to have exactly as much to say for himself as the others. no one of them can carry out his own notion of justice without trampling upon another equally binding. these are difficulties; they have always been felt to be such; and many devices have been invented to turn rather than to overcome them. as a refuge from the last of the three, men imagined what they called the freedom of the will; fancying that they could not justify punishing a man whose will is in a thoroughly hateful state, unless it be supposed to have come into that state through no influence of anterior circumstances. to escape from the other difficulties, a favourite contrivance has been the fiction of a contract, whereby at some unknown period all the members of society engaged to obey the laws, and consented to be punished for any disobedience to them; thereby giving to their legislators the right, which it is assumed they would not otherwise have had, of punishing them, either for their own good or for that of society. this happy thought was considered to get rid of the whole difficulty, and to legitimate the infliction of punishment, in virtue of another received maxim of justice, volenti non fit injuria; that is not unjust which is done with the consent of the person who is supposed to be hurt by it. i need hardly remark, that even if the consent were not a mere fiction, this maxim is not superior in authority to the others which it is brought in to supersede. it is, on the contrary, an instructive specimen of the loose and irregular manner in which supposed principles of justice grow up. this particular one evidently came into use as a help to the coarse exigencies of courts of law, which are sometimes obliged to be content with very uncertain presumptions, on account of the greater evils which would often arise from any attempt on their part to cut finer. but even courts of law are not able to adhere consistently to the maxim, for they allow voluntary engagements to be set aside on the ground of fraud, and sometimes on that of mere mistake or misinformation.
for instance, some say that (1) it is unjust to punish anyone for the sake of setting an example for others; that punishment is just only when it is intended for the good of the sufferer himself. others maintain the exact opposite, contending that (2) to punish adults for their own benefit is despotism and injustice, since if the matter at issue is solely their own good no-one has a right to control their own judgment of it; but that someone may justly be punished to prevent evil to others, this being the exercise of the legitimate right of self-defence. mr. owen affirms that (3) is unjust to punish at all; for the criminal didn't make his own character; his upbringing and environment have made him a criminal, and he isn't responsible for these. all these opinions are extremely plausible; and so long as the question is argued simply as one of justice, without going down to the principles that underlie justice and are the source of its authority, i don't see how any of these reasoners can be refuted. for in truth each of the three builds on rules of justice that are admittedly true. (1) appeals to the acknowledged injustice of singling out an individual and sacrificing him, without his consent, for other people's benefit. (2) relies on the acknowledged justice of self-defence, and the admitted injustice of forcing one person to conform to someone else's notions of what is good for him. (3) the owenite invokes the admitted principle that it is unjust to punish anyone for what he cannot help. each moralist is triumphant so long as he isn't forced to take into consideration any maxims of justice except the one he has selected; but as soon as their different maxims are brought face to face, each disputant seems to have exactly as much to say for himself as the others have to say for themselves. no one of them can carry out his own notion of justice without trampling on some other notion of it that is equally binding. these are difficulties; they have always been felt to be such; and many devices have been invented to get around them rather than to overcome them. as a refuge from (3) men imagined what they called freedom of the will, fancying that they couldn't justify punishing a man whose will is in a thoroughly odious state unless prior circumstances are thought to have played no part in his coming to be in that state. a favourite device for escaping from the other difficulties has been the fiction of a contract a contract through which at some unknown period all the members of society promised to obey the laws and consented to be punished for any disobedience to them. this contract was supposed to give to the legislators a right which it is assumed they wouldn't otherwise have had, to punish lawbreakers either for their own good or for the good of society. this nice idea was thought to get rid of the whole difficulty and to legitimize the infliction of punishment on the strength of another accepted maxim of justice,. namely that something isn't unjust if it is done with the consent of the person who is supposed to be hurt by it. i need hardly remark that even if this consent were not a mere fiction, this maxim doesn't have greater authority than the others that it is brought in to supersede. on the contrary, it's an instructive specimen of the loose and irregular manner in which supposed principles of justice spring up.

again, when the legitimacy of inflicting punishment is admitted, how many conflicting conceptions of justice come to light in discussing the proper apportionment of punishment to offences. no rule on this subject recommends itself so strongly to the primitive and spontaneous sentiment of justice, as the lex talionis, an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. though this principle of the jewish and of the mahomedan law has been generally abandoned in europe as a practical maxim, there is, i suspect, in most minds, a secret hankering after it; and when retribution accidentally falls on an offender in that precise shape, the general feeling of satisfaction evinced, bears witness how natural is the sentiment to which this repayment in kind is acceptable. with many the test of justice in penal infliction is that the punishment should be proportioned to the offence; meaning that it should be exactly measured by the moral guilt of the culprit (whatever be their standard for measuring moral guilt): the consideration, what amount of punishment is necessary to deter from the offence, having nothing to do with the question of justice, in their estimation: while there are others to whom that consideration is all in all; who maintain that it is not just, at least for man, to inflict on a fellow creature, whatever may be his offences, any amount of suffering beyond the least that will suffice to prevent him from repeating, and others from imitating, his misconduct.
and when it is agreed that it is legitimate to inflict some punishment, many conflicting conceptions of justice come to light when people discuss what i.e. discuss the proper apportionment of punishments to offences. no rule on this subject recommends itself so strongly to the primitive and spontaneous sentiment of justice as the lex talionis an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. this principle of jewish and moslem law has been generally abandoned in europe as a practical maxim, but i suspect that there is in most minds a secret hankering after it; and when retribution happens falls on an offender in that precise shape, the general feeling of satisfaction that arises shows how natural is the sentiment that endorses this repayment in kind. for many people the test of justice in this area is that the punishment should be proportional to the offence, meaning that it should be exactly measured by the culprit's moral guilt (whatever their standard is for measuring that). according to these people, the question what amount of punishment is necessary to deter potential offenders from offending? has nothing to do with the question of justice, whereas for other people that question is the whole topic. according to them, men cannot justly inflict on a fellow creature, no matter what his offences have been, any amount of suffering beyond the least that will suffice to prevent him from repeating his misconduct and others from imitating it. (men cannot justly do this; they may have a different view about what god can justly do.)

to take another example from a subject already once referred to. in a co-operative industrial association, is it just or not that talent or skill should give a title to superior remuneration? on the negative side of the question it is argued, that whoever does the best he can, deserves equally well, and ought not in justice to be put in a position of inferiority for no fault of his own; that superior abilities have already advantages more than enough, in the admiration they excite, the personal influence they command, and the internal sources of satisfaction attending them, without adding to these a superior share of the world's goods; and that society is bound in justice rather to make compensation to the less favoured, for this unmerited inequality of advantages, than to aggravate it. on the contrary side it is contended, that society receives more from the more efficient labourer; that his services being more useful, society owes him a larger return for them; that a greater share of the joint result is actually his work, and not to allow his claim to it is a kind of robbery; that if he is only to receive as much as others, he can only be justly required to produce as much, and to give a smaller amount of time and exertion, proportioned to his superior efficiency. who shall decide between these appeals to conflicting principles of justice? justice has in this case two sides to it, which it is impossible to bring into harmony, and the two disputants have chosen opposite sides; the one looks to what it is just that the individual should receive, the other to what it is just that the community should give. each, from his own point of view, is unanswerable; and any choice between them, on grounds of justice, must be perfectly arbitrary. social utility alone can decide the preference.
to take another example from a subject i have already referred to. in a co-operative industrial association, is it just or not that someone's talent or skill should entitle him to higher pay? on the negative side of the question it is argued that whoever does his best deserves equally well, and can't justly be put in a worse position through no fault of his own; that higher abilities already bring more than enough advantages the admiration they arouse, the personal influence they command, and the internal sources of satisfaction that come with them without adding to these a greater share of the world's goods; and that society is bound in justice to compensate the less favoured for this undeserved inequality of advantages, rather than to make it worse. on the opposite side it is maintained that society receives more from the more efficient worker; that because his services are more useful, society owes him a larger return for them; that a greater share of the joint result is actually his work, and not to allow his claim to it is a kind of robbery; that if he is only to receive as much as others, he can only be justly required to produce as much and to give a smaller amount of time and effort in proportion to his greater efficiency. who is to decide between these appeals to conflicting principles of justice? in this case justice has two sides to it, which can't be brought into harmony, and the two disputants have chosen opposite sides one looking to what it is just that the individual should receive, the other to what it is just that the community should give. each from his own point of view is unanswerable; and any choice between them on grounds of justice must be perfectly arbitrary. only social utility can decide the preference.

how many, again, and how irreconcileable, are the standards of justice to which reference is made in discussing the repartition of taxation. one opinion is, that payment to the state should be in numerical proportion to pecuniary means. others think that justice dictates what they term graduated taxation; taking a higher percentage from those who have more to spare. in point of natural justice a strong case might be made for disregarding means altogether, and taking the same absolute sum (whenever it could be got) from every one: as the subscribers to a mess, or to a club, all pay the same sum for the same privileges, whether they can all equally afford it or not. since the protection (it might be said) of law and government is afforded to, and is equally required by, all, there is no injustice in making all buy it at the same price. it is reckoned justice, not injustice, that a dealer should charge to all customers the same price for the same article, not a price varying according to their means of payment. this doctrine, as applied to taxation, finds no advocates, because it conflicts strongly with men's feelings of humanity and perceptions of social expediency; but the principle of justice which it invokes is as true and as binding as those which can be appealed to against it. accordingly, it exerts a tacit influence on the line of defence employed for other modes of assessing taxation. people feel obliged to argue that the state does more for the rich than for the poor, as a justification for its taking more from them: though this is in reality not true, for the rich would be far better able to protect themselves, in the absence of law or government, than the poor, and indeed would probably be successful in converting the poor into their slaves. others, again, so far defer to the same conception of justice, as to maintain that all should pay an equal capitation tax for the protection of their persons (these being of equal value to all), and an unequal tax for the protection of their property, which is unequal. to this others reply, that the all of one man is as valuable to him as the all of another. from these confusions there is no other mode of extrication than the utilitarian.
taxation then consider how many and how irreconcilable are the standards of justice that people bring into discussions of taxation. one opinion is that payment to the state should be numerically proportional to the person's wealth. others think that justice dictates graduated taxation, as they call it, taking a higher percentage from those who have more to spare. in the light of natural justice a strong case might be made for disregarding wealth altogether and taking the same absolute sum from everyone who could pay it just as the subscribers to an association or a club all pay the same sum for the same privileges, whether or not they can all equally afford it. since the protection (it might be said) of law and government is provided to everyone and equally demanded by everyone, there is no injustice in making them all buy it at the same price. it is regarded as justice, not injustice, for a shop-keeper to charge to all his customers the same price for the same article, not varying the price according to their means of payment. nobody actually advocates this doctrine, as applied to taxation, because it conflicts so strongly with man's feelings of humanity and of social expediency; but the principle of justice it relies on is as true and as binding as any principles of justice that can be appealed to against it. accordingly it silently influences lines of defence that are employed for other ways of assessing taxation. people feel obliged to argue that the state does more for the rich than for the poor, as a justification for its taking more from them (though really that isn't true, for if there were no law or government the rich would be far better able to protect themselves than the poor would be, and indeed would probably succeed in making the poor their slaves). and others defer to the same-price-for-same-goods conception of justice when they maintain that all should pay an equal tax for the protection of their persons (these being of equal value to all), and an unequal tax for the protection of their property (which is unequal in its value). opponents of this proposal reply that my everything is as valuable to me as your everything is to you, even if you own much more than i do. the only way of extricating ourselves from these confusions is the utilitarian way.

is, then, the difference between the just and the expedient a merely imaginary distinction? have mankind been under a delusion in thinking that justice is a more sacred thing than policy, and that the latter ought only to be listened to after the former has been satisfied? by no means. the exposition we have given of the nature and origin of the sentiment, recognises a real distinction; and no one of those who profess the most sublime contempt for the consequences of actions as an element in their morality, attaches more importance to the distinction than i do. while i dispute the pretensions of any theory which sets up an imaginary standard of justice not grounded on utility, i account the justice which is grounded on utility to be the chief part, and incomparably the most sacred and binding part, of all morality. justice is a name for certain classes of moral rules, which concern the essentials of human well-being more nearly, and are therefore of more absolute obligation, than any other rules for the guidance of life; and the notion which we have found to be of the essence of the idea of justice, that of a right residing in an individual, implies and testifies to this more binding obligation.
well, then, is the line between the just and the expedient a merely imaginary distinction? have mankind been deluded in thinking that justice is a more sacred thing than policy, and that policy considerations ought not to be listened to until the demands of justice have been satisfied? by no means. the account i have given of the nature and origin of the sentiment of justice recognises a real distinction. i attach importance to this justice/expediency distinction at least as much as any of the moralists who grandly express their utter contempt for the consequences of actions as an element in their morality! while i dispute the claims of any theory that sets up an imaginary standard of justice that isn't based on utility, i regard the justice that is based on utility as being the chief part, and incomparably the most sacred and binding part, of all morality. justice is a name for certain kinds of moral rules that concern the essentials of human well-being more closely, and therefore are more absolutely binding, than any other rules for the guidance of life; and the notion that we have found to be of the essence of the idea of justice that of a right residing in an individual implies and testifies to this more binding obligation.

the moral rules which forbid mankind to hurt one another (in which we must never forget to include wrongful interference with each other's freedom) are more vital to human well-being than any maxims, however important, which only point out the best mode of managing some department of human affairs. they have also the peculiarity, that they are the main element in determining the whole of the social feelings of mankind. it is their observance which alone preserves peace among human beings: if obedience to them were not the rule, and disobedience the exception, every one would see in every one else a probable enemy, against whom he must be perpetually guarding himself. what is hardly less important, these are the precepts which mankind have the strongest and the most direct inducements for impressing upon one another. by merely giving to each other prudential instruction or exhortation, they may gain, or think they gain, nothing: in inculcating on each other the duty of positive beneficence they have an unmistakeable interest, but far less in degree: a person may possibly not need the benefits of others; but he always needs that they should not do him hurt. thus the moralities which protect every individual from being harmed by others, either directly or by being hindered in his freedom of pursuing his own good, are at once those which he himself has most at heart, and those which he has the strongest interest in publishing and enforcing by word and deed. it is by a person's observance of these, that his fitness to exist as one of the fellowship of human beings, is tested and decided; for on that depends his being a nuisance or not to those with whom he is in contact. now it is these moralities primarily, which compose the obligations of justice. the most marked cases of injustice, and those which give the tone to the feeling of repugnance which characterizes the sentiment, are acts of wrongful aggression, or wrongful exercise of power over some one; the next are those which consist in wrongfully withholding from him something which is his due; in both cases, inflicting on him a positive hurt, either in the form of direct suffering, or of the privation of some good which he had reasonable ground, either of a physical or of a social kind, for counting upon.
the moral rules that forbid mankind to hurt one another (remembering always to include in this the wrongful interference with each other's freedom) are more vital to human well-being than any maxims, however important, that merely point out the best way of managing some aspect of human affairs. they have also the special feature that they have more to do with mankind's social feelings than anything else does. their being observed is the only thing that preserves peace among human beings: if it weren't for the fact that obedience to them is the rule and disobedience the exception, everyone would see everyone else as an enemy against whom he must be perpetually guarding himself. almost equally important is the fact that these are the precepts that mankind have the strongest and the most direct reasons to get one another to accept. by merely giving each other prudential instruction or exhortation, they may gain nothing (or think they gain nothing). everyone has an unmistakable interest in urging on others the duty of positive beneficence, but nothing like as strong an interest as everyone has in urging on others the duty of justice: a person might not need the benefits that others might give him, but he always needs them not to harm him. thus the moralities that protect every individual from being harmed by others, either directly or by being hindered in his freedom to pursue his own good, are both the ones that he himself has most at heart and also the ones that he has the strongest interest in announcing and enforcing by word and deed. it is by a person's observance of these that we test and decide whether he is fit to exist as one of the fellowship of human beings, for that determines whether he will be harmful to those with whom he is in contact. now, these are the moralities that primarily make up the obligations of justice. the most conspicuous cases of injustice the ones that give its tone to the feeling of repugnance that characterises the sentiment are acts of wrongful aggression, or wrongful exercise of power over someone; the next are acts that consist in wrongfully withholding from a person something that is his due; in both cases a positive hurt is inflicted on him, in the form either of direct suffering or of the lack of some good that he had reasonable grounds, either of a physical or of a social kind, for counting on.

the same powerful motives which command the observance of these primary moralities, enjoin the punishment of those who violate them; and as the impulses of self-defence, of defence of others, and of vengeance, are all called forth against such persons, retribution, or evil for evil, becomes closely connected with the sentiment of justice, and is universally included in the idea. good for good is also one of the dictates of justice; and this, though its social utility is evident, and though it carries with it a natural human feeling, has not at first sight that obvious connexion with hurt or injury, which, existing in the most elementary cases of just and unjust, is the source of the characteristic intensity of the sentiment. but the connexion, though less obvious, is not less real. he who accepts benefits, and denies a return of them when needed, inflicts a real hurt, by disappointing one of the most natural and reasonable of expectations, and one which he must at least tacitly have encouraged, otherwise the benefits would seldom have been conferred. the important rank, among human evils and wrongs, of the disappointment of expectation, is shown in the fact that it constitutes the principal criminality of two such highly immoral acts as a breach of friendship and a breach of promise. few hurts which human beings can sustain are greater, and none wound more, than when that on which they habitually and with full assurance relied, fails them in the hour of need; and few wrongs are greater than this mere withholding of good; none excite more resentment, either in the person suffering, or in a sympathizing spectator. the principle, therefore, of giving to each what they deserve, that is, good for good as well as evil for evil, is not only included within the idea of justice as we have defined it, but is a proper object of that intensity of sentiment, which places the just, in human estimation, above the simply expedient.
the same powerful motives that command us to observe these primary moralities tell us to punish the people who violate them. this calls up the impulses of self-defence, of defence of others and of vengeance against such people; and for that reason retribution or evil for evil comes to be closely connected with the sentiment of justice, and is included in everyone's idea of justice. good for good is also one of the dictates of justice. this is obviously socially useful, and carries with it a natural human feeling; but it doesn't have at first sight the obvious connection with hurt or injury that is the source of the characteristic intensity of the sentiment of justice, and is present in the most elementary cases of just and unjust. but although the connection with hurt or injury is less obvious, it is not less real. someone who accepts benefits and refuses to give benefits in return at a time when they are needed inflicts a real hurt, by disappointing a very natural and reasonable expectation an expectation that he must at least tacitly have encouraged, for otherwise (in most cases) the benefits would not have been conferred in the first place. the disappointment of expectation ranks high among human evils and wrongs, as is shown in the fact that it constitutes the principal criminality of two highly immoral acts breach of friendship and breach of promise. few hurts that human beings can receive are greater, and none wound more, than when someone that a person has habitually and confidently relied on fails him in his hour of need; and few wrongs are greater than this mere withholding of good; none arouse more resentment in the suffering person or in a sympathising spectator. so the principle of giving to each what he deserves i.e. good for good as well as evil for evil is not only included within the idea of justice as i have defined it but is a proper object of that intensity of sentiment which leads people to put the just higher than the merely expedient.

most of the maxims of justice current in the world, and commonly appealed to in its transactions, are simply instrumental to carrying into effect the principles of justice which we have now spoken of. that a person is only responsible for what he has done voluntarily, or could voluntarily have avoided; that it is unjust to condemn any person unheard; that the punishment ought to be proportioned to the offence, and the like, are maxims intended to prevent the just principle of evil for evil from being perverted to the infliction of evil without that justification. the greater part of these common maxims have come into use from the practice of courts of justice, which have been naturally led to a more complete recognition and elaboration than was likely to suggest itself to others, of the rules necessary to enable them to fulfil their double function, of inflicting punishment when due, and of awarding to each person his right.
most of the maxims of justice that are current in the world, and commonly appealed to in dealings where justice is involved, are simply ways of putting into effect the principles of justice that i have spoken of. that a person is responsible only for what he has voluntarily done or could voluntarily have avoided, it is unjust to condemn any person without giving him a hearing, the punishment ought to be proportional to the offence, and the like, are maxims intended to prevent the just principle of evil for evil from being twisted to the infliction of evil without that justification. most of these common maxims have come into use from the practice of courts of justice, which have laid down the rules that are necessary if they are to fulfil their double function of inflicting punishment when it is due and of awarding to each person his right. it was only natural that they should have been led to a more complete recognition and elaboration of such rules than was likely to occur to anyone else.

it appears from what has been said, that justice is a name for certain moral requirements, which, regarded collectively, stand higher in the scale of social utility, and are therefore of more paramount obligation, than any others; though particular cases may occur in which some other social duty is so important, as to overrule any one of the general maxims of justice. thus, to save a life, it may not only be allowable, but a duty, to steal, or take by force, the necessary food or medicine, or to kidnap, and compel to officiate, the only qualified medical practitioner. in such cases, as we do not call anything justice which is not a virtue, we usually say, not that justice must give way to some other moral principle, but that what is just in ordinary cases is, by reason of that other principle, not just in the particular case. by this useful accommodation of language, the character of indefeasibility attributed to justice is kept up, and we are saved from the necessity of maintaining that there can be laudable injustice.
from what i have said it appears that justice is a name for certain moral requirements which, regarded collectively, stand higher in the scale of social utility and are therefore more bindingly obligatory than any others; though particular cases may occur in which some other social duty is important enough to overrule one of the general maxims of justice. any of those maxims could be overruled in that way. thus, to save a life it may be not merely allowable but a duty to steal or take by force the necessary food or medicine, or to kidnap the only qualified medical practitioner and compel him to serve. we don't call anything justice that isn't a virtue; so in these cases of overruling we usually say not that justice must give way to some other moral principle but rather that what is just in ordinary cases is not just in this particular case because of that other principle, the one that does the overruling. by this useful adjustment of language we enable justice to keep its character as something that can't be overruled, and we're spared the necessity of maintaining that injustice can sometimes be praiseworthy.

the considerations which have now been adduced resolve, i conceive, the only real difficulty in the utilitarian theory of morals. it has always been evident that all cases of justice are also cases of expediency: the difference is in the peculiar sentiment which attaches to the former, as contradistinguished from the latter. if this characteristic sentiment has been sufficiently accounted for; if there is no necessity to assume for it any peculiarity of origin; if it is simply the natural feeling of resentment, moralized by being made coextensive with the demands of social good; and if this feeling not only does but ought to exist in all the classes of cases to which the idea of justice corresponds; that idea no longer presents itself as a stumbling-block to the utilitarian ethics. justice remains the appropriate name for certain social utilities which are vastly more important, and therefore more absolute and imperative, than any others are as a class (though not more so than others may be in particular cases); and which, therefore, ought to be, as well as naturally are, guarded by a sentiment not only different in degree, but also in kind; distinguished from the milder feeling which attaches to the mere idea of promoting human pleasure or convenience, at once by the more definite nature of its commands, and by the sterner character of its sanctions.
the considerations that i have brought forward seem to me to resolve the only real difficulty confronting the utilitarian theory of morals. it has always been evident that all cases of justice are also cases of expediency: the difference is in the special sentiment that attaches to the former and not to the latter. if this characteristic sentiment has been sufficiently accounted for; if there is no need to credit it with having some special origin all of its own; if it is simply the natural feeling of resentment, made moral by being made coextensive with the demands of social good; and if this feeling not only does but ought to exist in all the classes of cases to which the idea of justice corresponds; then the idea of justice no longer presents itself as a stumbling-block to utilitarian ethics. justice remains the appropriate name for certain social utilities. the utilities in question are vastly more important, and therefore more absolute and imperative, than any others are as a class (though not more so than others may be in particular cases); so they ought to be (and naturally are) guarded by a sentiment that differs from others not only in degree but also in kind. the sentiment of justice is distinguished from the milder feeling that attaches to the mere idea of promoting human pleasure or convenience by the more definite nature of its commands and by the sterner character of its sanctions.

chapter i.
chapter 1: the question can be raised

the object of this essay is to explain as clearly as i am able, the grounds of an opinion which i have held from the very earliest period when i had formed any opinions at all on social or political matters, and which, instead of being weakened or modified, has been constantly growing stronger by the progress of reflection and the experience of life: that the principle which regulates the existing social relations between the two sexes the legal subordination of one sex to the other is wrong in itself, and now one of the chief hindrances to human improvement; and that it ought to be replaced by a principle of perfect equality, admitting no power or privilege on the one side, nor disability on the other.
the object of this essay is to explain as clearly as i can the reasons for following proposition: the principle that regulates the existing social relations between the two sexes the legal subordination of one sex to the other is wrong itself, and is now one of the chief obstacles to human improvement; and it ought to be replaced by a principle of perfect equality that doesn't allow any power or privilege on one side or disability on the other. for convenience i'll call this the opinion. i have accepted the opinion from the earliest time when i had any views on social political matters; and instead of being weakened or modified through the years it has grown steadily stronger in my mind through reflection and my experience of life.

the very words necessary to express the task i have undertaken, show how arduous it is. but it would be a mistake to suppose that the difficulty of the case must lie in the insufficiency or obscurity of the grounds of reason on which my conviction rests. the difficulty is that which exists in all cases in which there is a mass of feeling to be contended against. so long as an opinion is strongly rooted in the feelings, it gains rather than loses in stability by having a preponderating weight of argument against it. for if it were accepted as a result of argument, the refutation of the argument might shake the solidity of the conviction; but when it rests solely on feeling, the worse it fares in argumentative contest, the more persuaded its adherents are that their feeling must have some deeper ground, which the arguments do not reach; and while the feeling remains, it is always throwing up fresh intrenchments of argument to repair any breach made in the old. and there are so many causes tending to make the feelings connected with this subject the most intense and most deeply-rooted of all those which gather round and protect old institutions and customs, that we need not wonder to find them as yet less undermined and loosened than any of the rest by the progress of the great modern spiritual and social transition; nor suppose that the barbarisms to which men cling longest must be less barbarisms than those which they earlier shake off.
the task i am undertaking here will be hard work. but don't think that the difficulty must come from the scarcity or obscurity of solid reasons for the opinion. rather, the difficulty is one that exists whenever something is being defended against a mass of feeling. just because the opposing view is strongly rooted in feelings, it is psychologically strengthened rather than weakened by having the weight of argument go against it. if it were accepted as a result of argument, counter-arguments might shake the solidity of the conviction; but when it rests solely on feeling, arguments against it don't shake it at all: the worse it fares in the clash of arguments, the more convinced its adherents are that their feeling must have some deeper basis that the arguments don't reach! and while the feeling remains, it keeps erecting fresh walls of argument to repair the gaps that have been made in the old ones. and there are so many factors giving intensity and deep roots to the feelings connected with our present subject making them more intense and deeper-rooted than the feelings that gather protectively around other old institutions and customs that we shouldn't be surprised to find those feelings to be less undermined and loosened than any of the others by the progress of the great modern spiritual and social transition; nor should we suppose that the barbarisms to which men cling longest must be less barbaric than the ones they shake off earlier.

in every respect the burthen is hard on those who attack an almost universal opinion. they must be very fortunate as well as unusually capable if they obtain a hearing at all. they have more difficulty in obtaining a trial, than any other litigants have in getting a verdict. if they do extort a hearing, they are subjected to a set of logical requirements totally different from those exacted from other people. in all other cases, the burthen of proof is supposed to lie with the affirmative. if a person is charged with a murder, it rests with those who accuse him to give proof of his guilt, not with himself to prove his innocence. if there is a difference of opinion about the reality of any alleged historical event, in which the feelings of men in general are not much interested, as the siege of troy for example, those who maintain that the event took place are expected to produce their proofs, before those who take the other side can be required to say anything; and at no time are these required to do more than show that the evidence produced by the others is of no value. again, in practical matters, the burthen of proof is supposed to be with those who are against liberty; who contend for any restriction or prohibition; either any limitation of the general freedom of human action, or any disqualification or disparity of privilege affecting one person or kind of persons, as compared with others. the a priori presumption is in favour of freedom and impartiality. it is held that there should be no restraint not required by the general good, and that the law should be no respecter of persons, but should treat all alike, save where dissimilarity of treatment is required by positive reasons, either of justice or of policy. but of none of these rules of evidence will the benefit be allowed to those who maintain the opinion i profess. it is useless for me to say that those who maintain the doctrine that men have a right to command and women are under an obligation to obey, or that men are fit for government and women unfit, are on the affirmative side of the question, and that they are bound to show positive evidence for the assertions, or submit to their rejection. it is equally unavailing for me to say that those who deny to women any freedom or privilege rightly allowed to men, having the double presumption against them that they are opposing freedom and recommending partiality, must be held to the strictest proof of their case, and unless their success be such as to exclude all doubt, the judgment ought to go against them. these would be thought good pleas in any common case; but they will not be thought so in this instance. before i could hope to make any impression, i should be expected not only to answer all that has ever been said by those who take the other side of the question, but to imagine all that could be said by them to find them in reasons, as well as answer all i find: and besides refuting all arguments for the affirmative, i shall be called upon for invincible positive arguments to prove a negative. and even if i could do all this, and leave the opposite party with a host of unanswered arguments against them, and not a single unrefuted one on their side, i should be thought to have done little; for a cause supported on the one hand by universal usage, and on the other by so great a preponderance of popular sentiment, is supposed to have a presumption in its favour, superior to any conviction which an appeal to reason has power to produce in any intellects but those of a high class.
those who attack an almost universal opinion are faced with difficulties all the way. they have to be very lucky and unusually able if they are to get a hearing at all. it is harder for them to obtain a trial than it is for any other litigants to obtain a verdict. and if they do get a hearing, it subjects them to a set of logical requirements totally different from the ones imposed on other people. (1) in all other cases, the burden of proof is supposed to lie with the affirmative: if someone is accused of murder, it's up to his accusers to prove his guilt, not for him to prove his innocence. if there's a difference of opinion about the reality of an alleged historical event that doesn't involve strong feelings in anyone the siege of troy, for example those who say that it did happen are expected to produce their proofs before the other side can be required to say anything; and the most they are ever required to do is to show that the evidence produced by their opponents is of no value. (2) again, in practical matters but none of these rules of evidence will be allowed to benefit those who maintain the opinion that i shall defend. it is useless for me to say: those who maintain that men have a right to command and women an obligation obey, or that men are fit for government and women unfit, are on the affirmative side of the question, and are bound to show positive evidence for their position or accept that it has been defeated. it is equally unavailing for me to say: those who deny to women any freedom or privilege that is rightly allowed to men are opposing freedom and recommending partiality, so there is a double presumption against them; and they should be held to the strictest standards of proof, with the judgment going against them unless they argue successfully enough to exclude all doubt. these would be regarded as good pleas in any ordinary case but not in this one! before i could hope to make any impression on the other side i would be expected not only to answer everything ever said by the opposition, but to imagine everything that could be said by them. and besides refuting all arguments for the affirmative anti-liberty pro-discrimination side, i'll be called upon for invincible positive arguments to prove a negative. and even if i could leave the opposite party with a host of unanswered arguments against them, and not a single unrefuted argument on their side, this wouldn't be regarded as much of an achievement; because a cause supported by universal usage and by such a great weight of popular sentiment is supposed to have a presumption in its favour, superior to any conviction that an appeal to reason can produce in intellects other than those of a high class.

i do not mention these difficulties to complain of them; first, because it would be useless; they are inseparable from having to contend through people's understandings against the hostility of their feelings and practical tendencies: and truly the understandings of the majority of mankind would need to be much better cultivated than has ever yet been the case, before they can be asked to place such reliance in their own power of estimating arguments, as to give up practical principles in which they have been born and bred and which are the basis of much of the existing order of the world, at the first argumentative attack which they are not capable of logically resisting. i do not therefore quarrel with them for having too little faith in argument, but for having too much faith in custom and the general feeling. it is one of the characteristic prejudices of the reaction of the nineteenth century against the eighteenth, to accord to the unreasoning elements in human nature the infallibility which the eighteenth century is supposed to have ascribed to the reasoning elements. for the apotheosis of reason we have substituted that of instinct; and we call everything instinct which we find in ourselves and for which we cannot trace any rational foundation. this idolatry, infinitely more degrading than the other, and the most pernicious of the false worships of the present day, of all of which it is now the main support, will probably hold its ground until it gives way before a sound psychology, laying bare the real root of much that is bowed down to as the intention of nature and the ordinance of god. as regards the present question, i am willing to accept the unfavourable conditions which the prejudice assigns to me. i consent that established custom, and the general feeling, should be deemed conclusive against me, unless that custom and feeling from age to age can be shown to have owed their existence to other causes than their soundness, and to have derived their power from the worse rather than the better parts of human nature. i am willing that judgment should go against me, unless i can show that my judge has been tampered with. the concession is not so great as it might appear; for to prove this, is by far the easiest portion of my task.
i am not complaining about these difficulties. it would be useless to do so, because they are inevitable when one has to argue through people's understandings against the hostility of their feelings and practical tendencies. i am up against practical principles in which people have been born and bred, and which are the basis of much existing order of the world; i can hardly expect them to surrender at the first argumentative attack that they aren't capable of logically resisting. that would require them to rely on their own power of estimating arguments, and that can't happen until the understandings of the majority of mankind are much better developed than they ever have been. so i am quarreling with my opponents not for having too little faith in argument but for having too much faith in custom and the general feeling. reason versus instinct the eighteenth century is supposed to have regarded the reasoning elements in human nature as infallible; in reaction against that, the nineteenth century attributes infallibility to the unreasoning elements. we have replaced the god-like status of reason by a god-like status for instinct; and we label as instinct anything that we find in ourselves and can't find any rational foundation for. this idolatry is infinitely more degrading than the other; of all the false worships of the present day, this one is the worst and is the main support of all the others. it probably won't be dislodged until a sound psychology lays bare the real root of much that people now bow down to as intended by nature and commanded by god. as regards the present question, i shall accept that established custom and general feelings should be regarded as conclusive against me, unless this custom and feeling can be shown to have owed their existence down through the ages to causes other than their soundness, and to have derived their power from the worse rather than the better parts of human nature. let the judgment go against me unless i can show that the judge in this case has been tampered with! this is a smaller concession than you might think, because proving this i.e. proving that there's something bad and wrong about the causes of the feelings that oppose me is by far the easiest part of my task.

the generality of a practice is in some cases a strong presumption that it is, or at all events once was, conducive to laudable ends. this is the case, when the practice was first adopted, or afterwards kept up, as a means to such ends, and was grounded on experience of the mode in which they could be most effectually attained. if the authority of men over women, when first established, had been the result of a conscientious comparison between different modes of constituting the government of society; if, after trying various other modes of social organization the government of women over men, equality between the two, and such mixed and divided modes of government as might be invented it had been decided, on the testimony of experience, that the mode in which women are wholly under the rule of men, having no share at all in public concerns, and each in private being under the legal obligation of obedience to the man with whom she has associated her destiny, was the arrangement most conducive to the happiness and well being of both; its general adoption might then be fairly thought to be some evidence that, at the time when it was adopted, if was the best: though even then the considerations which recommended it may, like so many other primeval social facts of the greatest importance, have subsequently, in the course of ages, ceased to exist. but the state of the case is in every respect the reverse of this. in the first place, the opinion in favour of the present system, which entirely subordinates the weaker sex to the stronger, rests upon theory only; for there never has been trial made of any other: so that experience, in the sense in which it is vulgarly opposed to theory, cannot be pretended to have pronounced any verdict. and in the second place, the adoption of this system of inequality never was the result of deliberation, or forethought, or any social ideas, or any notion whatever of what conduced to the benefit of humanity or the good order of society. it arose simply from the fact that from the very earliest twilight of human society, every woman (owing to the value attached to her by men, combined with her inferiority in muscular strength) was found in a state of bondage to some man. laws and systems of polity always begin by recognising the relations they find already existing between individuals. they convert what was a mere physical fact into a legal right, give it the sanction of society, and principally aim at the substitution of public and organized means of asserting and protecting these rights, instead of the irregular and lawless conflict of physical strength. those who had already been compelled to obedience became in this manner legally bound to it. slavery, from being a mere affair of force between the master and the slave, became regularized and a matter of compact among the masters, who, binding themselves to one another for common protection, guaranteed by their collective strength the private possessions of each, including his slaves. in early times, the great majority of the male sex were slaves, as well as the whole of the female. and many ages elapsed, some of them ages of high cultivation, before any thinker was bold enough to question the rightfulness, and the absolute social necessity, either of the one slavery or of the other. by degrees such thinkers did arise: and (the general progress of society assisting) the slavery of the male sex has, in all the countries of christian europe at least (though, in one of them, only within the last few years) been at length abolished, and that of the female sex has been gradually changed into a milder form of dependence. but this dependence, as it exists at present, is not an original institution, taking a fresh start from considerations of justice and social expediency it is the primitive state of slavery lasting on, through successive mitigations and modifications occasioned by the same causes which have softened the general manners, and brought all human relations more under the control of justice and the influence of humanity. it has not lost the taint of its brutal origin. no presumption in its favour, therefore, can be drawn from the fact of its existence. the only such presumption which it could be supposed to have, must be grounded on its having lasted till now, when so many other things which came down from the same odious source have been done away with. and this, indeed, is what makes it strange to ordinary ears, to hear it asserted that the inequality of rights between men and women has no other source than the law of the strongest.
if a practice is very general, this sometimes creates a strong presumption that it is or at any rate was conducive to praiseworthy ends. this is the case when the practice was first started (or later kept up) as a means to such ends, and was based on experience of how the ends could be most effectively be achieved. if the following were the case when the authority of men over women was first established, that was the result of conscientiously comparing different ways of structuring the government of society; various other types of social organisation were tried the government of women over men, equality between the two, and other such mixed and divided structures of government; and people's experience of those convinced them that the best arrangement for producing the happiness and well-being of both women and men was the one in which women are wholly under the rule of men, having no share at all in public concerns, and each in private being legally obliged to obey the man with whom she has associated her destiny if that were the case (i repeat), that would provide some evidence that when the subjection of women was first adopted it was the best (though even then the social facts that recommended it may have since then ceased to be facts). but the state of the case is in every respect the reverse of this. (1) the opinion in favour of the present system rests on theory only, for no other system has been tried; so that experience, as contrasted with theory, can't be claimed to have pronounced any verdict. (2) the adoption of this system of inequality never was the result of deliberation, or forethought, or any social ideas, or any notion whatever of what would be best for humanity or the good order of society. it arose simply from the fact that from the dawn of human society every woman was in a state of bondage to some man, because she was of value to him and she had less muscular strength than he did. laws and political systems always begin by recognising the relations they find already existing between individuals, converting a mere physical fact into a legal right, giving it the sanction of society; their main aim is to replace the assertion and protection of these rights by irregular and lawless conflict of physical strength by the assertion and protection of these same rights by public and organised means. in this way, those who had already been compelled to obey became legally bound to obey. slavery, at first a mere affair of force between the master and the slave, came to be governed by rules, and to be a matter of agreement among the masters: binding themselves to one another for common protection, the masters guaranteed by their collective strength the private possessions of each, including his slaves. in early times, most males were slaves, as well as all females. and many centuries passed some of them times of high cultivation before any thinker was bold enough to ask is it right? is it absolutely socially necessary? about either of these slaveries. gradually such thinkers did arise; and at last the slavery of the male sex has been abolished in all the countries of christian europe; and the slavery of the female sex has been gradually changed into a milder form of dependence. but this dependence, as it exists at present, is not an original institution, taking a fresh start from considerations of justice and social expediency it is the primitive state of slavery lasting on through a series of weakenings brought about by the same causes that have softened all kinds of conduct and brought all human relations more under the control of justice and the influence of humanity. the subjection of women hasn't lost the taint of its brutal origin. so the mere fact of its existence doesn't create any presumption in its favour. anyone who wants there to be a presumption in its favour had better try to get it from the fact that the subjection of women has survived, while many products of the same odious source have been done away with. and that fact is what makes the statement the inequality of rights between men and women has no other source than the law of the strongest sound strange to ordinary ears.

that this statement should have the effect of a paradox, is in some respects creditable to the progress of civilization, and the improvement of the moral sentiments of mankind. we now live that is to say, one or two of the most advanced nations of the world now live in a state in which the law of the strongest seems to be entirely abandoned as the regulating principle of the world's affairs: nobody professes it, and, as regards most of the relations between human beings, nobody is permitted to practise it. when any one succeeds in doing so, it is under cover of some pretext which gives him the semblance of having some general social interest on his side. this being the ostensible state of things, people flatter themselves that the rule of mere force is ended; that the law of the strongest cannot be the reason of existence of anything which has remained in full operation down to the present time. however any of our present institutions may have begun, it can only, they think, have been preserved to this period of advanced civilization by a well-grounded feeling of its adaptation to human nature, and conduciveness to the general good. they do not understand the great vitality and durability of institutions which place right on the side of might; how intensely they are clung to; how the good as well as the bad propensities and sentiments of those who have power in their hands, become identified with retaining it; how slowly these bad institutions give way, one at a time, the weakest first, beginning with those which are least interwoven with the daily habits of life; and how very rarely those who have obtained legal power because they first had physical, have ever lost their hold of it until the physical power had passed over to the other side. such shifting of the physical force not having taken place in the case of women; this fact, combined with all the peculiar and characteristic features of the particular case, made it certain from the first that this branch of the system of right founded on might, though softened in its most atrocious features at an earlier period than several of the others, would be the very last to disappear. it was inevitable that this one case of a social relation grounded on force, would survive through generations of institutions grounded on equal justice, an almost solitary exception to the general character of their laws and customs; but which, so long as it does not proclaim its own origin, and as discussion has not brought out its true character, is not felt to jar with modern civilization, any more than domestic slavery among the greeks jarred with their notion of themselves as a free people.
that this statement should sound like a paradox is in some respects creditable to the progress of civilisation and the improvement of mankind's moral sentiments. we now live i.e. one or two of the world's most advanced nations now live in a state in which the law of the strongest seems to be entirely abandoned as the regulating principle of the world's affairs: nobody proclaims it, and in most contexts nobody is permitted to practise it. when anyone succeeds in doing so, he disguises it through the pretence that he has some general social interest on his side. this being the apparent state of things, people flatter themselves that the rule of mere force is ended; that the law of the strongest can't be the reason for the existence of anything that has remained in full operation down to the present time. they think: however any of our present institutions may have begun, no institution can have been preserved into this period of advanced civilisation except by a well-grounded feeling that it fits human nature and is conducive to the general good. they don't understand the great vitality and durability of institutions that place right on the side of might; how intensely they are clung to; how the good as well as the bad propensities and sentiments of those who have power in their hands become identified with retaining it; how slowly these bad institutions give way, one at a time, the weakest first. beginning with those that are least interwoven with the daily habits of life; and how very rarely those who have obtained legal power because they first had physical power have ever lost their hold of it until the physical power had passed over to the other side. that shifting of the physical force didn't happen in the case of women; and this fact, combined with all the special features of this particular case, made it certain from the outset that this branch of the system of right founded on might would be the very last to disappear (though its most atrocious features were softened earlier than several of the others). so it isn't surprising that the subjection of women, as long as it doesn't proclaim its own origin and there is no discussion bringing to light its true character, isn't felt to jar with modern civilisation, any more than domestic slavery among the greeks jarred with their notion of themselves as a free people. modern changes of attitude

the truth is, that people of the present and the last two or three generations have lost all practical sense of the primitive condition of humanity; and only the few who have studied history accurately, or have much frequented the parts of the world occupied by the living representatives of ages long past, are able to form any mental picture of what society then was. people are not aware how entirely, in former ages, the law of superior strength was the rule of life; how publicly and openly it was avowed, i do not say cynically or shamelessly for these words imply a feeling that there was something in it to be ashamed of, and no such notion could find a place in the faculties of any person in those ages, except a philosopher or a saint. history gives a cruel experience of human nature, in shewing how exactly the regard due to the life, possessions, and entire earthly happiness of any class of persons, was measured by what they had the power of enforcing; how all who made any resistance to authorities that had arms in their hands, however dreadful might be the provocation, had not only the law of force but all other laws, and all the notions of social obligation against them; and in the eyes of those whom they resisted, were not only guilty of crime, but of the worst of all crimes, deserving the most cruel chastisement which human beings could inflict. the first small vestige of a feeling of obligation in a superior to acknowledge any right in inferiors, began when he had been induced, for convenience, to make some promise to them. though these promises, even when sanctioned by the most solemn oaths, were for many ages revoked or violated on the most trifling provocation or temptation, it is probable that this, except by persons of still worse than the average morality, was seldom done without some twinges of conscience. the ancient republics, being mostly grounded from the first upon some kind of mutual compact, or at any rate formed by an union of persons not very unequal in strength, afforded, in consequence, the first instance of a portion of human relations fenced round, and placed under the dominion of another law than that of force. and though the original law of force remained in full operation between them and their slaves, and also (except so far as limited by express compact) between a commonwealth and its subjects, or other independent commonwealths; the banishment of that primitive law even from so narrow a field, commenced the regeneration of human nature, by giving birth to sentiments of which experience soon demonstrated the immense value even for material interests, and which thenceforward only required to be enlarged, not created. though slaves were no part of the commonwealth, it was in the free states that slaves were first felt to have rights as human beings. the stoics were, i believe, the first (except so far as the jewish law constitutes an exception) who taught as a part of morality that men were bound by moral obligations to their slaves. no one, after christianity became ascendant, could ever again have been a stranger to this belief, in theory; nor, after the rise of the catholic church, was it ever without persons to stand up for it. yet to enforce it was the most arduous task which christianity ever had to perform. for more than a thousand years the church kept up the contest, with hardly any perceptible success. it was not for want of power over men's minds. its power was prodigious. it could make kings and nobles resign their most valued possessions to enrich the church. it could make thousands, in the prime of life and the height of worldly advantages, shut themselves up in convents to work out their salvation by poverty, fasting, and prayer. it could send hundreds of thousands across land and sea, europe and asia, to give their lives for the deliverance of the holy sepulchre. it could make kings relinquish wives who were the object of their passionate attachment, because the church declared that they were within the seventh (by our calculation the fourteenth) degree of relationship. all this it did; but it could not make men fight less with one another, nor tyrannize less cruelly over the serfs, and when they were able, over burgesses. it could not make them renounce either of the applications of force; force militant, or force triumphant. this they could never be induced to do until they were themselves in their turn compelled by superior force. only by the growing power of kings was an end put to fighting except between kings, or competitors for kingship; only by the growth of a wealthy and warlike bourgeoisie in the fortified towns, and of a plebeian infantry which proved more powerful in the field than the undisciplined chivalry, was the insolent tyranny of the nobles over the bourgeoisie and peasantry brought within some bounds. it was persisted in not only until, but long after, the oppressed had obtained a power enabling them often to take conspicuous vengeance; and on the continent much of it continued to the time of the french revolution, though in england the earlier and better organization of the democratic classes put an end to it sooner, by establishing equal laws and free national institutions.
the truth is that people of the present and the last two or three generations have lost all practical sense of the primitive condition of humanity. the only ones who can form any mental picture of what society was like in ancient times are the few who have studied history or have spent much time in parts of the world occupied by the living representatives of ages long past. people don't now realize how entirely, in former ages, the law of superior strength was the rule of life, and how publicly and openly it was proclaimed. (note the adverbs i have chosen. i don't say cynically or shamelessly, because those words imply a feeling that there was something in it to be ashamed of, and in those earlier ages only a philosopher or a saint could have room in his mind for any such notion.) history gives a cruel experience of human nature, in showing that the regard due to the life, possessions, and entire earthly happiness of any category of people was measured precisely by what they had the power of enforcing; and that all who in any way resisted authorities that had power, however dreadful might be the provocation, were opposed not only by the law of force but also by all other laws and all the notions of social duty; and were regarded by those whom they resisted as being guilty of the worst of all crimes, deserving the cruellest punishments human beings could inflict.. all this it did; but it couldn't make men fight less with one another, or be less cruel in their tyranny over the serfs and (when they could) over ordinary citizens. only by the growing power of kings was an end put to fighting (except between kings or competitors for kingship); only by the growth of a wealthy and warlike bourgeoisie in the fortified towns, and of a peasant infantry that proved more powerful in battle than undisciplined knights on horseback, were some limits set to the insolent tyranny of the nobles over the bourgeoisie and peasantry. this tyranny was persisted in until long after the oppressed had acquired enough power to be able, often, to get conspicuous revenge; and on the continent much of it continued up to the time of the french revolution, though in england the earlier and better organisation of the democratic classes put an end to it sooner, by establishing equal laws and free national institutions.

some will object, that a comparison cannot fairly be made between the government of the male sex and the forms of unjust power which i have adduced in illustration of it, since these are arbitrary, and the effect of mere usurpation, while it on the contrary is natural. but was there ever any domination which did not appear natural to those who possessed it? there was a time when the division of mankind into two classes, a small one of masters and a numerous one of slaves, appeared, even to the most cultivated minds, to be a natural, and the only natural, condition of the human race. no less an intellect, and one which contributed no less to the progress of human thought, than aristotle, held this opinion without doubt or misgiving; and rested it on the same premises on which the same assertion in regard to the dominion of men over women is usually based, namely that there are different natures among mankind, free natures, and slave natures; that the greeks were of a free nature, the barbarian races of thracians and asiatics of a slave nature. but why need i go back to aristotle? did not the slaveowners of the southern united states maintain the same doctrine, with all the fanaticism with which men cling to the theories that justify their passions and legitimate their personal interests? did they not call heaven and earth to witness that the dominion of the white man over the black is natural, that the black race is by nature incapable of freedom, and marked out for slavery? some even going so far as to say that the freedom of manual labourers is an unnatural order of things anywhere. again, the theorists of absolute monarchy have always affirmed it to be the only natural form of government; issuing from the patriarchal, which was the primitive and spontaneous form of society, framed on the model of the paternal, which is anterior to society itself, and, as they contend, the most natural authority of all. nay, for that matter, the law of force itself, to those who could not plead any other, has always seemed the most natural of all grounds for the exercise of authority. conquering races hold it to be nature's own dictate that the conquered should obey the conquerors, or, as they euphoniously paraphrase it, that the feebler and more unwarlike races should submit to the braver and manlier. the smallest acquaintance with human life in the middle ages, shows how supremely natural the dominion of the feudal nobility over men of low condition appeared to the nobility themselves, and how unnatural the conception seemed, of a person of the inferior class claiming equality with them, or exercising authority over them. it hardly seemed less so to the class held in subjection. the emancipated serfs and burgesses, even in their most vigorous struggles, never made any pretension to a share of authority; they only demanded more or less of limitation to the power of tyrannizing over them. so true is it that unnatural generally means only uncustomary, and that everything which is usual appears natural. the subjection of women to men being a universal custom, any departure from it quite naturally appears unnatural. but how entirely, even in this case, the feeling is dependent on custom, appears by ample experience. nothing so much astonishes the people of distant parts of the world, when they first learn anything about england, as to be told that it is under a queen: the thing seems to them so unnatural as to be almost incredible. to englishmen this does not seem in the least degree unnatural, because they are used to it; but they do feel it unnatural that women should be soldiers or members of parliament. in the feudal ages, on the contrary, war and politics were not thought unnatural to women, because not unusual; it seemed natural that women of the privileged classes should be of manly character, inferior in nothing but bodily strength to their husbands and fathers. the independence of women seemed rather less unnatural to the greeks than to other ancients, on account of the fabulous amazons (whom they believed to be historical), and the partial example afforded by the spartan women; who, though no less subordinate by law than in other greek states, were more free in fact, and being trained to bodily exercises in the same manner with men, gave ample proof that they were not naturally disqualified for them. there can be little doubt that spartan experience suggested to plato, among many other of his doctrines, that of the social and political equality of the two sexes.
some will object that it's not fair to compare the government of the male sex with the other forms of unjust power that i have discussed, because it is natural while the others are arbitrary and brought about by mere usurpation. but was there ever any domination that didn't appear natural to those who possessed it? there was a time when the division of mankind into a small class of masters and a large class of slaves appeared, even to the most cultivated minds, to be the only natural condition of the human race! aristotle, with his great intellect and his great contributions to the progress of human thought, held this opinion without doubt or misgiving; and his reason for it was the reason usually given for the dominion of men over women, namely that there are different natures among mankind, free natures and slave natures; that the greeks were of a free nature, the barbarian races of thracians and asiatics of a slave nature. again, the theorists of absolute monarchy have always claimed it to be the only natural form of government, descending ultimately from the authority of a father over his family, which is older and more basic than society itself and, they contend, the most natural authority of all. indeed the law of force itself has always seemed the most natural of all grounds for the exercise of authority has seemed so, i mean, to those who haven't been able to find any other basis for their favoured form of tyranny. conquering races hold it to be nature's own dictate that the feebler and more unwarlike races should submit to the braver and more manly, or, to put it more bluntly, that the conquered should obey the conquerors. the smallest acquaintance with human life in the middle ages shows how supremely natural the dominion of the feudal nobility over men of low condition appeared to the nobility themselves, and how unnatural the conception seemed, of a person of the inferior class claiming equality with them or exercising authority over them. and it seemed almost as natural to the class held in subjection: the emancipated serfs and citizenry, even in their most vigorous struggles, never claimed a share of authority; they only demanded some limitation to the power of tyrannising over them. so true is it that unnatural generally means only uncustomary, and that whatever is usual appears natural. the subjection of women to men is a universal custom, so any departure from it quite naturally appears unnatural!. when people in distant parts of the world first learn anything about england, they are astonished to be told that england is under a queen; that seems to them so unnatural as to be almost incredible. to englishmen it doesn't seem at all unnatural, because they are used to it; but they do feel it unnatural that women should be soldiers or members of parliament. in the feudal ages, on the other hand, war and politics were not thought unnatural to women, because they were not unusual; it seemed natural that women of the privileged classes should be of manly character, inferior in nothing but bodily strength to their husbands and fathers. the independence of women seemed rather less unnatural to the greeks than to other peoples in ancient times, because of the mythical amazons (whom they believed to be historical), and the partial example of the women of sparta, who, though they were by law just as subordinate to men as the women in other greek states, were more free in fact; they were trained to bodily exercises in the same way as the men, giving ample proof that they were not naturally disqualified for them. there can be little doubt that spartan experience suggested to plato, among many other of his doctrines, that of the social and political equality of the two sexes.

but, it will be said, the rule of men over women differs from all these others in not being a rule of force: it is accepted voluntarily; women make no complaint, and are consenting parties to it. in the first place, a great number of women do not accept it. ever since there have been women able to make their sentiments known by their writings (the only mode of publicity which society permits to them), an increasing number of them have recorded protests against their present social condition: and recently many thousands of them, headed by the most eminent women known to the public, have petitioned parliament for their admission to the parliamentary suffrage. the claim of women to be educated as solidly, and in the same branches of knowledge, as men, is urged with growing intensity, and with a great prospect of success; while the demand for their admission into professions and occupations hitherto closed against them, becomes every year more urgent. though there are not in this country, as there are in the united states, periodical conventions and an organized party to agitate for the rights of women, there is a numerous and active society organized and managed by women, for the more limited object of obtaining the political franchise. nor is it only in our own country and in america that women are beginning to protest, more or less collectively, against the disabilities under which they labour. france, and italy, and switzerland, and russia now afford examples of the same thing. how many more women there are who silently cherish similar aspirations, no one can possibly know; but there are abundant tokens how many would cherish them, were they not so strenuously taught to repress them as contrary to the proprieties of their sex. it must be remembered, also, that no enslaved class ever asked for complete liberty at once. when simon de montfort called the deputies of the commons to sit for the first time in parliament, did any of them dream of demanding that an assembly, elected by their constituents, should make and destroy ministries, and dictate to the king in affairs of state? no such thought entered into the imagination of the most ambitious of them. the nobility had already these pretensions; the commons pretended to nothing but to be exempt from arbitrary taxation, and from the gross individual oppression of the king's officers. it is a political law of nature that those who are under any power of ancient origin, never begin by complaining of the power itself, but only of its oppressive exercise. there is never any want of women who complain of ill usage by their husbands. there would be infinitely more, if complaint were not the greatest of all provocatives to a repetition and increase of the ill usage. it is this which frustrates all attempts to maintain the power but protect the woman against its abuses. in no other case (except that of a child) is the person who has been proved judicially to have suffered an injury, replaced under the physical power of the culprit who inflicted it. accordingly wives, even in the most extreme and protracted cases of bodily ill usage, hardly ever dare avail themselves of the laws made for their protection: and if, in a moment of irrepressible indignation, or by the interference of neighbours, they are induced to do so, their whole effort afterwards is to disclose as little as they can, and to beg off their tyrant from his merited chastisement.
it will be said that the rule of men over women differs from all these others in not being a rule a rule of force, that it is accepted voluntarily, that women don't complain, and are consenting parties to it. well, the first point to make is that a great number of women do not accept it. ever since there have been women able to make their sentiments known by their writings (the only form of going-public that society permits to them), increasingly many of them have protested against their present social condition; and recently many thousands of them, headed by the most eminent women known to the public, petitioned parliament to allow them the vote. the claim of women to be educated as well and as broadly as men as men is urged with growing intensity and with a great prospect of success; while the demand for their admission into professions and occupations that have so far been closed to them becomes more urgent every year. when simon de montfort called the representatives of the common people to sit for the first time in parliament, did any of them dream of demanding that such an assembly should make and destroy ministries, and dictate to the king in affairs of state? no such thought entered into the imagination of the most ambitious of them. the nobility were already claiming such powers; the common people claimed only to be exempt from arbitrary taxation and from the gross individual oppression of the king's officers. it is a political law of nature that those who are subjected to any power of very long standing never begin by complaining of the power itself, but only of the oppressive use of it. there's never any shortage of women who complain of ill-usage by their husbands. there would be infinitely more if complaints weren't apt to provoke the husbands to repeat and increase the ill-usage. that is what frustrates all attempts to maintain the power but protect the woman against its abuses. in no other case (except that of a child) is a person who has been proved judicially to have suffered an injury put back into the physical power of the culprit who inflicted it! that is why wives, even in the most extreme and long-drawn-out cases of bodily ill-usage, hardly ever dare make use of the laws that have been made for their protection; and if a woman is induced to do so in a moment of irrepressible indignation, or through the interference of neighbours all she does from there on is to reveal as little as possible and to beg off her tyrant from the punishment he deserves.

all causes, social and natural, combine to make it unlikely that women should be collectively rebellious to the power of men. they are so far in a position different from all other subject classes, that their masters require something more from them than actual service. men do not want solely the obedience of women, they want their sentiments. all men, except the most brutish, desire to have, in the woman most nearly connected with them, not a forced slave but a willing one, not a slave merely, but a favourite. they have therefore put everything in practice to enslave their minds. the masters of all other slaves rely, for maintaining obedience, on fear; either fear of themselves, or religious fears. the masters of women wanted more than simple obedience, and they turned the whole force of education to effect their purpose. all women are brought up from the very earliest years in the belief that their ideal of character is the very opposite to that of men; not self-will, and government by self-control, but submission, and yielding to the control of others. all the moralities tell them that it is the duty of women, and all the current sentimentalities that it is their nature, to live for others; to make complete abnegation of themselves, and to have no life but in their affections. and by their affections are meant the only ones they are allowed to have those to the men with whom they are connected, or to the children who constitute an additional and indefeasible tie between them and a man. when we put together three things first, the natural attraction between opposite sexes; secondly, the wife's entire dependence on the husband, every privilege or pleasure she has being either his gift, or depending entirely on his will; and lastly, that the principal object of human pursuit, consideration, and all objects of social ambition, can in general be sought or obtained by her only through him, it would be a miracle if the object of being attractive to men had not become the polar star of feminine education and formation of character. and, this great means of influence over the minds of women having been acquired, an instinct of selfishness made men avail themselves of it to the utmost as a means of holding women in subjection, by representing to them meekness, submissiveness, and resignation of all individual will into the hands of a man, as an essential part of sexual attractiveness. can it be doubted that any of the other yokes which mankind have succeeded in breaking, would have subsisted till now if the same means had existed, and had been as sedulously used, to bow down their minds to it? if it had been made the object of the life of every young plebeian to find personal favour in the eyes of some patrician, of every young serf with some seigneur; if domestication with him, and a share of his personal affections, had been held out as the prize which they all should look out for, the most gifted and aspiring being able to reckon on the most desirable prizes; and if, when this prize had been obtained, they had been shut out by a wall of brass from all interests not centering in him, all feelings and desires but those which he shared or inculcated; would not serfs and seigneurs, plebeians and patricians, have been as broadly distinguished at this day as men and women are? and would not all but a thinker here and there, have believed the distinction to be a fundamental and unalterable fact in human nature?
women are in a different position from all other subject classes in this: their masters require more from them than actual service. men want not only the obedience of women but also their sentiments. all but the most brutish of men want to have, in the woman most nearly connected with them, not a forced slave but a willing one, not a slave merely but a favourite. so they have done everything they could to enslave women's minds. the masters of all other slaves get obedience through fear, either of themselves or of some religious punishment. the masters of women wanted more than simple obedience, and they turned the whole force of education to get what they wanted. all women are brought up from their earliest years to believe that their ideal of character is the very opposite to that of men: not self-will and government by self-control, but submission and accepting control by someone else. all the moralities tell them that it is their duty, and all the current ideas about feelings tell them that it is their nature, to live for others to set aside their own wishes and interests and have no life but in their affections. and by their affections are meant the only ones they are allowed to have those to the men with whom they are connected, or to the children who constitute an additional and unbreakable tie between them and a man. when we put together these three things (1) the natural attraction between opposite sexes; (2) the wife's entire dependence on the husband, with every privilege or pleasure that she has being either his gift or depending entirely on his will; (3) the fact that it is only through the man that the woman can seek or obtain the principal object of human pursuit, namely consideration, or any objects of social ambition; it would be a miracle if the objective of being attractive to men had not become the polar star of feminine education and formation of character. and once men had acquired this great means of influence over the minds of women, an instinct of selfishness made them avail themselves of it to the utmost as a means of keeping women in subjection, by telling them that an essential part of sexual attractiveness is meekness, submissiveness, and delivering all individual will into the hands of a man.

the preceding considerations are amply sufficient to show that custom, however universal it may be, affords in this case no presumption, and ought not to create any prejudice, in favour of the arrangements which place women in social and political subjection to men. but i may go farther, and maintain that the course of history, and the tendencies of progressive human society, afford not only no presumption in favour of this system of inequality of rights, but a strong one against it; and that, so far as the whole course of human improvement up to this time, the whole stream of modern tendencies, warrants any inference on the subject, it is, that this relic of the past is discordant with the future, and must necessarily disappear.
the course of history what i have said up to here is quite enough to show that custom, however universal it may be, doesn't create any presumption in favour of the arrangements that put women in social and political subjection to men. but i go further, and maintain that the course of history and the tendencies of progressive human society create a strong presumption against this system of inequality of rights; and that if we can infer anything from the whole course of human improvement up to now the whole stream of modern tendencies it is that this relic of the past is out of tune with the future and must necessarily disappear.

for, what is the peculiar character of the modern world the difference which chiefly distinguishes modern institutions, modern social ideas, modern life itself, from those of times long past? it is, that human beings are no longer born to their place in life, and chained down by an inexorable bond to the place they are born to, but are free to employ their faculties, and such favourable chances as offer, to achieve the lot which may appear to them most desirable. human society of old was constituted on a very different principle. all were born to a fixed social position, and were mostly kept in it by law, or interdicted from any means by which they could emerge from it. as some men are born white and others black, so some were born slaves and others freemen and citizens; some were born patricians, others plebeians; some were born feudal nobles, others commoners and roturiers. a slave or serf could never make himself free, nor, except by the will of his master, become so. in most european countries it was not till towards the close of the middle ages, and as a consequence of the growth of regal power, that commoners could be ennobled. even among nobles, the eldest son was born the exclusive heir to the paternal possessions, and a long time elapsed before it was fully established that the father could disinherit him. among the industrious classes, only those who were born members of a guild, or were admitted into it by its members, could lawfully practise their calling within its local limits; and nobody could practise any calling deemed important, in any but the legal manner by processes authoritatively prescribed. manufacturers have stood in the pillory for presuming to carry on their business by new and improved methods. in modern europe, and most in those parts of it which have participated most largely in all other modern improvements, diametrically opposite doctrines now prevail. law and government do not undertake to prescribe by whom any social or industrial operation shall or shall not be conducted, or what modes of conducting them shall be lawful. these things are left to the unfettered choice of individuals. even the laws which required that workmen should serve an apprenticeship, have in this country been repealed: there being ample assurance that in all cases in which an apprenticeship is necessary, its necessity will suffice to enforce it. the old theory was, that the least possible should be left to the choice of the individual agent; that all he had to do should, as far as practicable, be laid down for him by superior wisdom. left to himself he was sure to go wrong. the modern conviction, the fruit of a thousand years of experience, is, that things in which the individual is the person directly interested, never go right but as they are left to his own discretion; and that any regulation of them by authority, except to protect the rights of others, is sure to be mischievous. this conclusion, slowly arrived at, and not adopted until almost every possible application of the contrary theory had been made with disastrous result, now (in the industrial department) prevails universally in the most advanced countries, almost universally in all that have pretensions to any sort of advancement. it is not that all processes are supposed to be equally good, or all persons to be equally qualified for everything; but that freedom of individual choice is now known to be the only thing which procures the adoption of the best processes, and throws each operation into the hands of those who are best qualified for it. nobody thinks it necessary to make a law that only a strong-armed man shall be a blacksmith. freedom and competition suffice to make blacksmiths strong-armed men, because the weak-armed can earn more by engaging in occupations for which they are more fit. in consonance with this doctrine, it is felt to be an overstepping of the proper bounds of authority to fix beforehand, on some general presumption, that certain persons are not fit to do certain things. it is now thoroughly known and admitted that if some such presumptions exist, no such presumption is infallible. even if it be well grounded in a majority of cases, which it is very likely not to be, there will be a minority of exceptional cases in which it does not hold: and in those it is both an injustice to the individuals, and a detriment to society, to place barriers in the way of their using their faculties for their own benefit and for that of others. in the cases, on the other hand, in which the unfitness is real, the ordinary motives of human conduct will on the whole suffice to prevent the incompetent person from making, or from persisting in, the attempt.
what is the special character of the modern world the difference that chiefly distinguishes modern institutions, modern social ideas, modern life itself, from those of times long past? it is that human beings are no longer born to their place in life, and chained down by an unbreakable bond to the place they are born to, but are free to use their talents and any good luck that comes their way to have the kind of life that they find most desirable. human society was for ages constituted on a very different principle. all were born to a fixed social position, and were mostly kept in it by law or debarred from any means by which they could emerge from it. as some men are born white and others black, so some were born slaves and others freemen and citizens; some were born patricians, others plebeians; some were born feudal nobles, others commoners and serfs. a slave or serf could never make himself free; his only route to freedom was through the will of his master. in modern europe, especially in the parts of it that have gone furthest in all other modern improvements, diametrically opposite doctrines now prevail. law and government don't prescribe who can and who can't conduct any social or industrial operation, or what procedures for conducting them shall be lawful. these things are left to the free choice of individuals. even the laws requiring workmen to serve an apprenticeship have been repealed in england, on the grounds that wherever an apprenticeship is necessary its necessity will force it to happen. the old theory was that as little as possible should be left to the choice of the individual, and that as far as was practicable his conduct should be laid down for him by superior wisdom. left to himself he was sure to go wrong. the modern conviction, based on a thousand years of experience, is that things that directly involve a person's interests never go right except when they are left to his own discretion; and that any regulation of them by authority, except to protect the rights of others, is sure to do harm. this conclusion was slowly arrived at, and not adopted until almost every possible application of the contrary theory had been made with disastrous result; but now the part of it that concerns work prevails in all the most advanced countries and in most of the others that have any claim to any sort of advancement. the thesis is not:

if this general principle of social and economical science is not true; if individuals, with such help as they can derive from the opinion of those who know them, are not better judges than the law and the government, of their own capacities and vocation; the world cannot too soon abandon this principle, and return to the old system of regulations and disabilities. but if the principle is true, we ought to act as if we believed it, and not to ordain that to be born a girl instead of a boy, any more than to be born black instead of white, or a commoner instead of a nobleman, shall decide the person's position through all life shall interdict people from all the more elevated social positions, and from all, except a few, respectable occupations. even were we to admit the utmost that is ever pretended as to the superior fitness of men for all the functions now reserved to them, the same argument applies which forbids a legal qualification for members of parliament. if only once in a dozen years the conditions of eligibility exclude a fit person, there is a real loss, while the exclusion of thousands of unfit persons is no gain; for if the constitution of the electoral body disposes them to choose unfit persons, there are always plenty of such persons to choose from. in all things of any difficulty and importance, those who can do them well are fewer than the need, even with the most unrestricted latitude of choice: and any limitation of the field of selection deprives society of some chances of being served by the competent, without ever saving it from the incompetent.
if this general principle of social and economic science is not true if individuals, perhaps with help from the opinion of those who know them, aren't better judges of their own capacities and vocation than the government is then the world should immediately abandon this principle and return to the old system of regulations and disabilities. but if the principle is true, we ought to act as if we believed it. we do accept that someone's being born black instead of white, or born a commoner instead of a nobleman, shouldn't fix his position throughout life, barring him from all the more elevated social positions and from nearly all respectable occupations. well, we should accept the same thing regarding someone's being born a girl instead of a boy. let us apply this to the legal requirement that a member of parliament must be a man. even if we accept the strongest claims that are ever made about the superior fitness of men for this role, the legal requirement is still wrong. if it happens only once in a dozen years that this law excludes a woman who is fit to be an m.p., that exclusion is a real loss to society, whereas the exclusion of thousands of unfit persons is no gain. if the electors are disposed to choose unfit persons as m.p.s, there are always plenty of those to choose from! for any difficult and important job, there is always a need for more people who could do it well than are actually available, even with the most unrestricted field of choice: and any limitation of the field of selection deprives society of some chances of being served by the competent, without ever saving it from the incompetent.

the social subordination of women thus stands out an isolated fact in modern social institutions; a solitary breach of what has become their fundamental law; a single relic of an old world of thought and practice exploded in everything else, but retained in the one thing of most universal interest; as if a gigantic dolmen, or a vast temple of jupiter olympius, occupied the site of st. paul's and received daily worship, while the surrounding christian churches were only resorted to on fasts and festivals. this entire discrepancy between one social fact and all those which accompany it, and the radical opposition between its nature and the progressive movement which is the boast of the modern world, and which has successively swept away everything else of an analogous character, surely affords, to a conscientious observer of human tendencies, serious matter for reflection. it raises a prima facie presumption on the unfavourable side, far outweighing any which custom and usage could in such circumstances create on the favourable; and should at least suffice to make this, like the choice between republicanism and royalty, a balanced question.
the social subordination of women thus stands out as an isolated fact in modern social institutions a solitary infringement of what has become their fundamental law, a single relic of an old world of thought and practice. this entire discrepancy between one social fact and all the others that accompany it, and the radical opposition between its nature and the progressive movement that is the boast of the modern world , provides something to be thought about seriously by any conscientious observer of human tendencies. it raises a prima facie presumption on the unfavourable side, far outweighing any presumption that custom and usage could create on the favourable side. it should be enough, at least, make this an issue with two sides to it like the issue between republicanism and royalty.

neither does it avail anything to say that the nature of the two sexes adapts them to their present functions and position, and renders these appropriate to them. standing on the ground of common sense and the constitution of the human mind, i deny that any one knows, or can know, the nature of the two sexes, as long as they have only been seen in their present relation to one another. if men had ever been found in society without women, or women without men, or if there had been a society of men and women in which the women were not under the control of the men, something might have been positively known about the mental and moral differences which may be inherent in the nature of each. what is now called the nature of women is an eminently artificial thing the result of forced repression in some directions, unnatural stimulation in others. it may be asserted without scruple, that no other class of dependents have had their character so entirely distorted from its natural proportions by their relation with their masters; for, if conquered and slave races have been, in some respects, more forcibly repressed, whatever in them has not been crushed down by an iron heel has generally been let alone, and if left with any liberty of development, it has developed itself according to its own laws; but in the case of women, a hot-house and stove cultivation has always been carried on of some of the capabilities of their nature, for the benefit and pleasure of their masters. then, because certain products of the general vital force sprout luxuriantly and reach a great development in this heated atmosphere and under this active nurture and watering, while other shoots from the same root, which are left outside in the wintry air, with ice purposely heaped all round them, have a stunted growth, and some are burnt off with fire and disappear; men, with that inability to recognise their own work which distinguishes the unanalytic mind, indolently believe that the tree grows of itself in the way they have made it grow, and that it would die if one half of it were not kept in a vapour bath and the other half in the snow.
the nature of women and it's no use saying that the nature of the two sexes fits them for their present functions and positions. standing on the ground of common sense and the constitution of the human mind, i deny that anyone can know the nature of the two sexes, as long as they have only been seen in their present relation to one another. what is now called the nature of women is an artificial thing the result of forced repression in some directions, unnatural stimulation in others. a hot-house and stove cultivation has always been provided for some of women's capabilities, for the benefit and pleasure of their masters. these sprout luxuriantly in this heated atmosphere and with active cultivation and watering; while other shoots from the same root, left outside in the wintry air with ice purposely heaped all around them, have a stunted growth, and some are burnt off with fire and disappear; and men with that inability to recognise their own work that distinguishes the unanalytic mind lazily believe that the tree grows of itself in the way they have made it grow, and that it would die if one half of it weren't kept in a vapour bath and the other half in the snow.

of all difficulties which impede the progress of thought, and the formation of well-grounded opinions on life and social arrangements, the greatest is now the unspeakable ignorance and inattention of mankind in respect to the influences which form human character. whatever any portion of the human species now are, or seem to be, such, it is supposed, they have a natural tendency to be: even when the most elementary knowledge of the circumstances in which they have been placed, clearly points out the causes that made them what they are. because a cottier deeply in arrears to his landlord is not industrious, there are people who think that the irish are naturally idle. because constitutions can be overthrown when the authorities appointed to execute them turn their arms against them, there are people who think the french incapable of free government. because the greeks cheated the turks, and the turks only plundered the greeks, there are persons who think that the turks are naturally more sincere: and because women, as is often said, care nothing about politics except their personalities, it is supposed that the general good is naturally less interesting to women than to men. history, which is now so much better understood than formerly, teaches another lesson: if only by showing the extraordinary susceptibility of human nature to external influences, and the extreme variableness of those of its manifestations which are supposed to be most universal and uniform. but in history, as in travelling, men usually see only what they already had in their own minds; and few learn much from history, who do not bring much with them to its study.
what is now the biggest obstacle to the progress of thought and the forming of well-grounded opinions about life and social arrangements is mankind's unspeakable inattention to the influences that form human character. because a peasant deeply in arrears to his landlord is not industrious, some people think that the irish are naturally idle. because constitutions can be overthrown when the authorities appointed to serve them turn their arms against them, some people think the french incapable of free government. because the greeks cheated the turks whereas the turks onlyplundered the greeks, some people think that the turks are naturally more sincere. because women (they say) don't care about politics excerpt for an interest in politicians, the general good is thought to be naturally less interesting to them than to men. history, which is now so much better understood than it used to be, teaches another lesson, if only by showing how enormously open human nature is to external influences, and how variable are human characteristics that are supposed to be most universal and uniform. but in history, as in travelling, men usually see only what they already had in their own minds.

hence, in regard to that most difficult question, what are the natural differences between the two sexes a subject on which it is impossible in the present state of society to obtain complete and correct knowledge while almost everybody dogmatizes upon it, almost all neglect and make light of the only means by which any partial insight can be obtained into it. this is, an analytic study of the most important department of psychology, the laws of the influence of circumstances on character. for, however great and apparently ineradicable the moral and intellectual differences between men and women might be, the evidence of their being natural differences could only be negative. those only could be inferred to be natural which could not possibly be artificial the residuum, after deducting every characteristic of either sex which can admit of being explained from education or external circumstances. the profoundest knowledge of the laws of the formation of character is indispensable to entitle any one to affirm even that there is any difference, much more what the difference is, between the two sexes considered as moral and rational beings; and since no one, as yet, has that knowledge, (for there is hardly any subject which, in proportion to its importance, has been so little studied), no one is thus far entitled to any positive opinion on the subject. conjectures are all that can at present be made; conjectures more or less probable, according as more or less authorized by such knowledge as we yet have of the laws of psychology, as applied to the formation of character.
what are the natural differences between the two sexes? in the present state of society we can't get a complete and correct answer to this; yet almost everybody dogmatises about it, hardly anyone attends seriously to the only source for even a partial answer. the source i'm referring to is an analytic study of the most important topic in psychology, namely the laws governing the influence of circumstances on character. why the emphasis on laws? because however great and apparently ineradicable the moral and intellectual differences between men and women might be, the only evidence we can have for there being natural differences is negative: inferring that a given difference is natural from evidence that it can't possibly be artificial. natural differences will be what is left behind after setting aside every characteristic of either sex that can be explained through external circumstances. to be entitled to affirm that there is any difference between the two sexes considered as moral and rational beings let alone to say what the difference is one must have the profoundest knowledge of the laws of the formation of character; and since no-one yet has that knowledge no-one is yet entitled to any positive opinion about this topic. regarding the lack of that knowledge: there is hardly any subject which, in proportion to its importance, has been so little studied!.

even the preliminary knowledge, what the differences between the sexes now are, apart from all question as to how they are made what they are, is still in the crudest and most incomplete state. medical practitioners and physiologists have ascertained, to some extent, the differences in bodily constitution; and this is an important element to the psychologist: but hardly any medical practitioner is a psychologist. respecting the mental characteristics of women; their observations are of no more worth than those of common men. it is a subject on which nothing final can be known, so long as those who alone can really know it, women themselves, have given but little testimony, and that little, mostly suborned. it is easy to know stupid women. stupidity is much the same all the world over. a stupid person's notions and feelings may confidently be inferred from those which prevail in the circle by which the person is surrounded. not so with those whose opinions and feelings are an emanation from their own nature and faculties. it is only a man here and there who has any tolerable knowledge of the character even of the women of his own family. i do not mean, of their capabilities; these nobody knows, not even themselves, because most of them have never been called out. i mean their actually existing thoughts and feelings. many a man thinks he perfectly understands women, because he has had amatory relations with several, perhaps with many of them. if he is a good observer, and his experience extends to quality as well as quantity, he may have learnt something of one narrow department of their nature an important department, no doubt. but of all the rest of it, few persons are generally more ignorant, because there are few from whom it is so carefully hidden. the most favourable case which a man can generally have for studying the character of a woman, is that of his own wife: for the opportunities are greater, and the cases of complete sympathy not so unspeakably rare. and in fact, this is the source from which any knowledge worth having on the subject has, i believe, generally come. but most men have not had the opportunity of studying in this way more than a single case: accordingly one can, to an almost laughable degree, infer what a man's wife is like, from his opinions about women in general. to make even this one case yield any result, the woman must be worth knowing, and the man not only a competent judge, but of a character so sympathetic in itself, and so well adapted to hers, that he can either read her mind by sympathetic intuition, or has nothing in himself which makes her shy of disclosing it. hardly anything, i believe, can be more rare than this conjunction. it often happens that there is the most complete unity of feeling and community of interests as to all external things, yet the one has as little admission into the internal life of the other as if they were common acquaintance. even with true affection, authority on the one side and subordination on the other prevent perfect confidence. though nothing may be intentionally withheld, much is not shown. in the analogous relation of parent and child, the corresponding phenomenon must have been in the observation of every one. as between father and son, how many are the cases in which the father, in spite of real affection on both sides, obviously to all the world does not know, nor suspect, parts of the son's character familiar to his companions and equals. the truth is, that the position of looking up to another is extremely unpropitious to complete sincerity and openness with him. the fear of losing ground in his opinion or in his feelings is so strong, that even in an upright character, there is an unconscious tendency to show only the best side, or the side which, though not the best, is that which he most likes to see: and it may be confidently said that thorough knowledge of one another hardly ever exists, but between persons who, besides being intimates, are equals. how much more true, then, must all this be, when the one is not only under the authority of the other, but has it inculcated on her as a duty to reckon everything else subordinate to his comfort and pleasure, and to let him neither see nor feel anything coming from her, except what is agreeable to him. all these difficulties stand in the way of a man's obtaining any thorough knowledge even of the one woman whom alone, in general, he has sufficient opportunity of studying. when we further consider that to understand one woman is not necessarily to understand any other woman; that even if he could study many women of one rank, or of one country, he would not thereby understand women of other ranks or countries; and even if he did, they are still only the women of a single period of history; we may safely assert that the knowledge which men can acquire of women, even as they have been and are, without reference to what they might be, is wretchedly imperfect and superficial, and always will be so, until women themselves have told all that they have to tell.
indeed we have only rough and incomplete knowledge of what the differences between the sexes now are, never mind how they came to be that way. medical practitioners and physiologists have discovered some of the differences in bodily constitution but they have no special qualifications for learning about the mental characteristics of women. that is a subject on which nothing final can be known, so long as the only people who can really know it women themselves have little to say about it and the little that they do say is mostly suborned, by which i mean that women are usually under pressure not to tell the truth about their own mental abilities. it is easy to know stupid women: stupidity is much the same all the world over; a stupid person's notions and feelings will be simply the ones that are prevalent in the social circles he or she moves in. it's a different story with people whose opinions and feelings come from their own individual nature and faculties. it's a rare man who has any significant knowledge of the character even of the women of his own family. i don't mean knowledge of their capabilities (nobody knows what those are, not even women themselves, because most of their abilities have never been called upon); i'm talking about their actual thoughts and feelings. many a man thinks he perfectly understands women because he has had romantic relations with several of them, perhaps with many of them. if he is a good observer and his experience has been of the right kind, he may have learned something about one narrow part of women's nature an important part, no doubt, but then there is all the rest. in general a man's best chance of studying the character of a woman is by attending to his own wife and this is in fact the source from which any knowledge worth having on the subject has generally come. but most men have had the opportunity of studying only one woman in this way, so that usually one can infer what a man's wife is like from his opinions about women in general! to make even this one case yield any result, it has to be the case that the woman is worth knowing, the man is a competent judge, and the man can read her mind by sympathetic intuition or has nothing in his character that makes her shy of disclosing it. this, i believe, is an extremely rare conjunction. it often happens that a husband and wife have complete unity of feeling and community of interests with respect to all external things, yet neither has any more admission into the internal life of the other than if they were mere acquaintances. even when there is true affection, authority on the one side and subordination on the other prevent perfect confidence. though nothing may be intentionally withheld, much is not shown. for two people to know one another thoroughly, they need to be not only intimates but equals. how much more true this must be when one of the two is not only under the other's authority but has had it drummed into her that it's her duty to subordinate everything to his comfort and pleasure, and to speak and act only in ways that are agreeable to him! these are obstacles to a man's getting thorough knowledge of the only woman he has sufficient opportunity of studying. add to this the fact that to understand one woman is not necessarily to understand any other woman; that even if a man studies many women of one social level or of one country, that won't enable him to understand women at other levels or in other countries; and even if he did that, those are still only the women of a single period of history. it is safe to say that the knowledge men can acquire of women, even as they have been and are never mind what they could be is wretchedly incomplete and superficial, and that it always will be so until women themselves have told all that they have to tell.

and this time has not come; nor will it come otherwise than gradually. it is but of yesterday that women have either been qualified by literary accomplishments, or permitted by society, to tell anything to the general public. as yet very few of them dare tell anything, which men, on whom their literary success depends, are unwilling to hear. let us remember in what manner, up to a very recent time, the expression, even by a male author, of uncustomary opinions, or what are deemed eccentric feelings, usually was, and in some degree still is, received; and we may form some faint conception under what impediments a woman, who is brought up to think custom and opinion her sovereign rule, attempts to express in books anything drawn from the depths of her own nature. the greatest woman who has left writings behind her sufficient to give her an eminent rank in the literature of her country, thought it necessary to prefix as a motto to her boldest work, un homme peut braver l'opinion; une femme doit s'y soumettre. the greater part of what women write about women is mere sycophancy to men. in the case of unmarried women, much of it seems only intended to increase their chance of a husband. many, both married and unmarried, overstep the mark, and inculcate a servility beyond what is desired or relished by any man, except the very vulgarest. but this is not so often the case as, even at a quite late period, it still was. literary women are becoming more freespoken, and more willing to express their real sentiments. unfortunately, in this country especially, they are themselves such artificial products, that their sentiments are compounded of a small element of individual observation and consciousness, and a very large one of acquired associations. this will be less and less the case, but it will remain true to a great extent, as long as social institutions do not admit the same free development of originality in women which is possible to men. when that time comes, and not before, we shall see, and not merely hear, as much as it is necessary to know of the nature of women, and the adaptation of other things to it.
and this time has not come, and if it does come it will do so gradually. only very recently have women been qualified by literary accomplishments and permitted by society to tell the general public anything. and very few of those have dared to tell anything that men, on whom their literary success depends, are unwilling to hear. if you remember how even a male author's expression of uncustomary opinions or what were regarded as eccentric feelings used to be (and sometimes still is) received, you'll get some faint conception of how hard it is for a woman, having been brought up to think custom and opinion her sovereign rule, to express in books anything drawn from the depths of her own nature. the greatest woman who has left writings behind her sufficient to give her an eminent rank in the literature of her country thought it necessary to prefix this motto to her boldest work un homme peut braver l'opinion; une femme doit s'y soumettre a man can openly defy public opinion; a woman has to submit to it. most of what women write about women is mere sycophancy to men. in the case of unmarried women, much of it seems only intended to increase their chance of getting a husband. literary women are becoming more free-spoken, and more willing to express their real sentiments. unfortunately, in this country especially, they are themselves such artificial products that their sentiments are made up of a small dose of individual observation and consciousness and a very large one of acquired associations. this will be less and less the case, but it will remain true to a great extent as long as social institutions don't allow to women the same free development of originality that is possible for men. when that time comes, and not before, we shall see, and not merely hear, as much as it is necessary to know of the nature of women, and the adaptation of other things to it.

i have dwelt so much on the difficulties which at present obstruct any real knowledge by men of the true nature of women, because in this as in so many other things opinio copi inter maximas causas inopi est; and there is little chance of reasonable thinking on the matter, while people flatter themselves that they perfectly understand a subject of which most men know absolutely nothing, and of which it is at present impossible that any man, or all men taken together, should have knowledge which can qualify them to lay down the law to women as to what is, or is not, their vocation. happily, no such knowledge is necessary for any practical purpose connected with the position of women in relation to society and life. for, according to all the principles involved in modern society, the question rests with women themselves to be decided by their own experience, and by the use of their own faculties. there are no means of finding what either one person or many can do, but by trying and no means by which any one else can discover for them what it is for their happiness to do or leave undone.
i have dwelt so much on the present obstacles to men's knowing the true nature of women because in this as in so many other things opinio copiae inter maximas causas inopiae est, i.e. one of the great causes of ignorance is believing that one knows a lot; and there's not much chance of reasonable thinking on this topic while people flatter themselves that they perfectly understand a subject of which most men know absolutely nothing. among other things, it is at present impossible for any man, or all men taken together, to have knowledge that would qualify them to dictate to women what is their vocation and what isn't. fortunately, no such knowledge is required for any practical purpose connected with women's relation to society and to life, because that question rests with women themselves to be decided by their experience and the use of their faculties.

one thing we may be certain of that what is contrary to women's nature to do, they never will be made to do by simply giving their nature free play. the anxiety of mankind to interfere in behalf of nature, for fear lest nature should not succeed in effecting its purpose, is an altogether unnecessary solicitude. what women by nature cannot do, it is quite superfluous to forbid them from doing. what they can do, but not so well as the men who are their competitors, competition suffices to exclude them from; since nobody asks for protective duties and bounties in favour of women; it is only asked that the present bounties and protective duties in favour of men should be recalled. if women have a greater natural inclination for some things than for others, there is no need of laws or social inculcation to make the majority of them do the former in preference to the latter. whatever women's services are most wanted for, the free play of competition will hold out the strongest inducements to them to undertake. and, as the words imply, they are most wanted for the things for which they are most fit; by the apportionment of which to them, the collective faculties of the two sexes can be applied on the whole with the greatest sum of valuable result.
one thing we can be certain of that if something is contrary to women's nature you won't get them to do it by giving their nature free play! there is no reason whatsoever for mankind to interfere on nature's behalf for fear that nature won't succeed in carrying out its purpose. if there's something they can do but not as well as the men who are their competitors, competition will exclude them from it; because what is being asked for is not protective duties and tariffs in favour of women, but only that the present tariffs and protective duties in favour of men should be recalled. if women have a greater natural inclination for x than for y, there's no need for laws or social indoctrination to make most of them do x in preference to y. whatever women's services are most wanted for, the free play of competition will hold out the strongest inducements to them to undertake. the need for compulsion

chapter ii.
chapter 2: the laws governing marriage

i have no desire to exaggerate, nor does the case stand in any need of exaggeration. i have described the wife's legal position, not her actual treatment. the laws of most countries are far worse than the people who execute them, and many of them are only able to remain laws by being seldom or never carried into effect. if married life were all that it might be expected to be, looking to the laws alone, society would be a hell upon earth. happily there are both feelings and interests which in many men exclude, and in most, greatly temper, the impulses and propensities which lead to tyranny: and of those feelings, the tie which connects a man with his wife affords, in a normal state of things, incomparably the strongest example. the only tie which at all approaches to it, that between him and his children, tends, in all save exceptional cases, to strengthen, instead of conflicting with, the first. because this is true; because men in general do not inflict, nor women suffer, all the misery which could be inflicted and suffered if the full power of tyranny with which the man is legally invested were acted on; the defenders of the existing form of the institution think that all its iniquity is justified, and that any complaint is merely quarrelling with the evil which is the price paid for every great good. but the mitigations in practice, which are compatible with maintaining in full legal force this or any other kind of tyranny, instead of being any apology for despotism, only serve to prove what power human nature possesses of reacting against the vilest institutions, and with what vitality the seeds of good as well as those of evil in human character diffuse and propagate themselves. not a word can be said for despotism in the family which cannot be said for political despotism. every absolute king does not sit at his window to enjoy the groans of his tortured subjects, nor strips them of their last rag and turns them out to shiver in the road. the despotism of louis xvi. was not the despotism of philippe le bel, or of nadir shah, or of caligula; but it was bad enough to justify the french revolution, and to palliate even its horrors. if an appeal be made to the intense attachments which exist between wives and their husbands, exactly as much may be said of domestic slavery. it was quite an ordinary fact in greece and rome for slaves to submit to death by torture rather than betray their masters. in the proscriptions of the roman civil wars it was remarked that wives and slaves were heroically faithful, sons very commonly treacherous. yet we know how cruelly many romans treated their slaves. but in truth these intense individual feelings nowhere rise to such a luxuriant height as under the most atrocious institutions. it is part of the irony of life, that the strongest feelings of devoted gratitude of which human nature seems to be susceptible, are called forth in human beings towards those who, having the power entirely to crush their earthly existence, voluntarily refrain from using that power. how great a place in most men this sentiment fills, even in religious devotion, it would be cruel to inquire. we daily see how much their gratitude to heaven appears to be stimulated by the contemplation of fellow-creatures to whom god has not been so merciful as he has to themselves.
i don't want to exaggerate and i don't need to! i have been describing the wife's legal position, not her actual treatment. the laws of most countries are far worse than the people who carry them out, and many of them couldn't remain laws if they were often enforced. if married life were just what might be expected from looking at the laws governing it, society would be a hell on earth. fortunately, there are feelings and interests that in many men exclude (and in most of the others at least mitigate) the impulses and propensities that lead to tyranny. in a normal state of things, the tie that connects a man with his wife provides by far the strongest example of such feelings. the only thing that comes anywhere near it is the tie between a man and his children, and this nearly always tends to strengthen the other tie. because this is true because men in general don't inflict (and women don't suffer) all the misery that could be inflicted (and suffered) if men used the full power of tyranny that the laws allow them the defenders of the existing form of the institution of marriage think that all its wickedness is justified, and that those who complain are merely quarrelling with the evil that is the price paid for every great good. but the loosenings in practice which are compatible with maintaining in full legal force the marriage tyranny don't serve as any kind of excuse for this despotism (and all of this goes for any kind of tyranny). the loosenings only serve to show human nature's power to react against the vilest institutions, and to show how energetically the seeds of good as well as those of evil in human character spread and propagate themselves. not a word can be said for despotism in the family that can't be said for political despotism. not every absolute king sits at his window to enjoy the groans of his tortured subjects, or strips them of their last rag and turns them out to shiver in the road. the despotism of louis xvi was not as bad as those of some others, but it was bad enough to justify the french revolution and to palliate even its horrors. what about the intense attachments that sometimes exist between wives and their husbands? they have also existed sometimes in domestic slavery. it wasn't unusual in greece and rome for slaves to submit to death by torture rather than betray their masters. in fact these intense individual feelings rise to their greatest height under the most atrocious institutions. it's part of the irony of life that human beings have their strongest feelings of devoted gratitude towards those who voluntarily refrain from using their power entirely to crush their earthly existence! how big a place does this sentiment have in the minds of most men, even in their religious devotion? that is a cruel question, and i shan't answer it here; but we daily see how much people's gratitude to god appears to be stimulated by the thought of fellow-creatures to whom he has been less merciful.

whether the institution to be defended is slavery, political absolutism, or the absolutism of the head of a family, we are always expected to judge of it from its best instances; and we are presented with pictures of loving exercise of authority on one side, loving submission to it on the other superior wisdom ordering all things for the greatest good of the dependents, and surrounded by their smiles and benedictions. all this would be very much to the purpose if any one pretended that there are no such things as good men. who doubts that there may be great goodness, and great happiness, and great affection, under the absolute government of a good man? meanwhile, laws and institutions require to be adapted, not to good men, but to bad. marriage is not an institution designed for a select few. men are not required, as a preliminary to the marriage ceremony, to prove by testimonials that they are fit to be trusted with the exercise of absolute power. the tie of affection and obligation to a wife and children is very strong with those whose general social feelings are strong, and with many who are little sensible to any other social ties; but there are all degrees of sensibility and insensibility to it, as there are all grades of goodness and wickedness in men, down to those whom no ties will bind, and on whom society has no action but through its ultima ratio, the penalties of the law. in every grade of this descending scale are men to whom are committed all the legal powers of a husband. the vilest malefactor has some wretched woman tied to him, against whom he can commit any atrocity except killing her, and, if tolerably cautious, can do that without much danger of the legal penalty. and how many thousands are there among the lowest classes in every country, who, without being in a legal sense malefactors in any other respect, because in every other quarter their aggressions meet with resistance, indulge the utmost habitual excesses of bodily violence towards the unhappy wife, who alone, at least of grown persons, can neither repel nor escape from their brutality; and towards whom the excess of dependence inspires their mean and savage natures, not with a generous forbearance, and a point of honour to behave well to one whose lot in life is trusted entirely to their kindness, but on the contrary with a notion that the law has delivered her to them as their thing, to be used at their pleasure, and that they are not expected to practise the consideration towards her which is required from them towards everybody else. the law, which till lately left even these atrocious extremes of domestic oppression practically unpunished, has within these few years made some feeble attempts to repress them. but its attempts have done little, and cannot be expected to do much, because it is contrary to reason and experience to suppose that there can be any real check to brutality, consistent with leaving the victim still in the power of the executioner. until a conviction for personal violence, or at all events a repetition of it after a first conviction, entitles the woman ipso facto to a divorce, or at least to a judicial separation, the attempt to repress these aggravated assaults by legal penalties will break down for want of a prosecutor, or for want of a witness.
when we are thinking about slavery, or political absolutism, or the absolutism of the head of a family, we are always expected to judge it by its best instances; and we are shown pictures of loving exercise of authority on one side, loving submission to it on the other superior wisdom ordering all things for the greatest good of the dependents, and surrounded by their smiles and benedictions. all this is simply irrelevant. who doubts that there may be great goodness, happiness, and affection under the absolute government of a good man? but laws and institutions should be adapted not to good men but to bad. marriage is not an institution designed for a select few. men are not required, as a preliminary to the marriage ceremony, to prove by testimonials that they are fit to be trusted with the exercise of absolute power. the tie of affection and obligation to a wife and children is very strong in men whose general social feelings are strong, and in many who don't have much sense of any other social ties. but a man's social feelings can come anywhere on a long scale of degrees of intensity, right down to the level of men who aren't bound by any ties and on whom society has no grip except through the threat of legal punishment. at every level on this descending scale there are men who are given all the legal powers of a husband. the vilest malefactor has tied to him some wretched woman against whom he can commit any atrocity except killing her and with a little care he can do even that without much danger of the legal penalty. among the lowest classes in every country, there are thousands of men who fit this description: he is not in a legal sense a malefactor in any other way, because everywhere except in his marriage his aggressions meet with resistance. so the physical violence that is habitual in him is exercised on his unhappy wife, who is the only adult person who can't block his brutality or escape from it. her dependence on him doesn't fill him with a generous forbearance, making it a point of honour to behave well to one whose life situation is entrusted entirely to his kindness; rather, it gives him the notion that the law has handed her over to him as his, to be used at his pleasure, and that he isn't expected to practise the consideration towards her that is required from him towards everybody else. until recently the law left even these atrocious extremes of domestic oppression practically unpunished; within the past few years it has made some feeble attempts to repress them. but these attempts haven't achieved much, and can't be expected to do so, because it is contrary to reason and experience to suppose that there can be any real barrier to brutality when the victim is left still in the power of the executioner. until a conviction for personal violence (or at least for a second offence) automatically entitles the woman to a divorce or at least to a judicial separation, the use of legal penalties to repress these aggravated assaults will fail for lack of a prosecutor or for lack of a witness.

when we consider how vast is the number of men, in any great country, who are little higher than brutes, and that this never prevents them from being able, through the law of marriage, to obtain a victim, the breadth and depth of human misery caused in this shape alone by the abuse of the institution swells to something appalling. yet these are only the extreme cases. they are the lowest abysses, but there is a sad succession of depth after depth before reaching them. in domestic as in political tyranny, the case of absolute monsters chiefly illustrates the institution by showing that there is scarcely any horror which may not occur under it if the despot pleases, and thus setting in a strong light what must be the terrible frequency of things only a little less atrocious. absolute fiends are as rare as angels, perhaps rarer: ferocious savages, with occasional touches of humanity, are however very frequent: and in the wide interval which separates these from any worthy representatives of the human species, how many are the forms and gradations of animalism and selfishness, often under an outward varnish of civilization and even cultivation, living at peace with the law, maintaining a creditable appearance to all who are not under their power, yet sufficient often to make the lives of all who are so, a torment and a burthen to them! it would be tiresome to repeat the commonplaces about the unfitness of men in general for power, which, after the political discussions of centuries, every one knows by heart, were it not that hardly any one thinks of applying these maxims to the case in which above all others they are applicable, that of power, not placed in the hands of a man here and there, but offered to every adult male, down to the basest and most ferocious. it is not because a man is not known to have broken any of the ten commandments, or because he maintains a respectable character in his dealings with those whom he cannot compel to have intercourse with him, or because he does not fly out into violent bursts of ill-temper against those who are not obliged to bear with him, that it is possible to surmise of what sort his conduct will be in the unrestraint of home. even the commonest men reserve the violent, the sulky, the undisguisedly selfish side of their character for those who have no power to withstand it. the relation of superiors to dependents is the nursery of these vices of character, which, wherever else they exist, are an overflowing from that source. a man who is morose or violent to his equals, is sure to be one who has lived among inferiors, whom he could frighten or worry into submission. if the family in its best forms is, as it is often said to be, a school of sympathy, tenderness, and loving forgetfulness of self, it is still oftener, as respects its chief, a school of wilfulness, overbearingness, unbounded self-indulgence, and a double-dyed and idealized selfishness, of which sacrifice itself is only a particular form: the care for the wife and children being only care for them as parts of the man's own interests and belongings, and their individual happiness being immolated in every shape to his smallest preferences. what better is to be looked for under the existing form of the institution? we know that the bad propensities of human nature are only kept within bounds when they are allowed no scope for their indulgence. we know that from impulse and habit, when not from deliberate purpose, almost every one to whom others yield, goes on encroaching upon them, until a point is reached at which they are compelled to resist. such being the common tendency of human nature; the almost unlimited power which present social institutions give to the man over at least one human being the one with whom he resides, and whom he has always present this power seeks out and evokes the latent germs of selfishness in the remotest corners of his nature fans its faintest sparks and smouldering embers offers to him a license for the indulgence of those points of his original character which in all other relations he would have found it necessary to repress and conceal, and the repression of which would in time have become a second nature. i know that there is another side to the question. i grant that the wife, if she cannot effectually resist, can at least retaliate; she, too, can make the man's life extremely uncomfortable, and by that power is able to carry many points which she ought, and many which she ought not, to prevail in. but this instrument of self-protection which may be called the power of the scold, or the shrewish sanction has the fatal defect, that it avails most against the least tyrannical superiors, and in favour of the least deserving dependents. it is the weapon of irritable and self-willed women; of those who would make the worst use of power if they themselves had it, and who generally turn this power to a bad use. the amiable cannot use such an instrument, the highminded disdain it. and on the other hand, the husbands against whom it is used most effectively are the gentler and more inoffensive; those who cannot be induced, even by provocation, to resort to any very harsh exercise of authority. the wife's power of being disagreeable generally only establishes a counter-tyranny, and makes victims in their turn chiefly of those husbands who are least inclined to be tyrants.
when we consider how many men are little higher than brutes, and that this never prevents them from being able through the marriage law to obtain a victim, the breadth and depth of human misery caused in this way swells to something appalling. yet these are only the extreme cases, the lowest abysses; on the way down the scale to them, there is a sad succession of depth after depth with misery increasing all the way. when we are considering domestic or political tyranny, the main point of attending to absolute monsters is to bring out the fact that there is scarcely any horror that can't occur under this tyranny if the despot pleases, which sets in a strong light what must be the terrible frequency of things that are only a little less atrocious. absolute fiends are as rare as angels, perhaps rarer; but ferocious savages with occasional touches of humanity are common; and in the wide interval that separates these from any worthy representatives of the human species, there is room for many forms and degrees of animality and selfishness. people whose nature lies in that interval often exist under an outward varnish of civilisation and even of culture, living at peace with the law and maintaining a creditable appearance to all who are not under their power, and yet make the lives of all who are under their power a torment and a burden. even the commonest men reserve the violent, the sulky, the undisguisedly selfish side of their character for those who have no power to withstand it. and their ability to do this doesn't just provide an outlet for violence, selfishness etc.; it is also the hothouse in which these vices grow and flourish. a man who is morose or violent to his equals is sure to be one who has lived among inferiors meaning people who have less power whom he could frighten or worry into submission. we know that the bad tendencies in human nature are kept within bounds only when they are allowed no scope for their indulgence. we know that almost everyone to whom others yield goes on encroaching on them until a point is reached at which they are compelled to resist; when this encroachment doesn't come from deliberate purpose, it comes from impulse and habit. because this is the common tendency of human nature, the almost unlimited power that present social institutions give to a man over his wife seeks out and encourages the latent seeds of selfishness in the remotest corners of his nature, giving him freedom to indulge the parts of his basic character that in all other relations he would have found it necessary to repress and conceal, and the repression of which would in time have become a second nature. i know that there's another side to the question: if the wife can't effectively resist, she can at least retaliate; she can make the man's life extremely uncomfortable, and that power of hers enables her to prevail in many matters where she ought to prevail, and many where she ought not. but this instrument of self-protection which may be called the power of the scold. has a fatal defect: it is most effective against the least tyrannical superiors and in favour of the least deserving dependents. it is the weapon of irritable and self-willed women, ones who would make the worst use of power if they themselves had it, and who generally turn this power the power of the scold to a bad use. and on the other hand, the husbands against whom it is used most effectively are the gentler and more inoffensive, the ones who even when provoked can't bring themselves to resort to any very harsh exercise of authority. the wife's power to be disagreeable usually serves only to establish a counter-tyranny, its victims being chiefly the husbands who are least inclined to be tyrants.

what is it, then, which really tempers the corrupting effects of the power, and makes it compatible with such amount of good as we actually see? mere feminine blandishments, though of great effect in individual instances, have very little effect in modifying the general tendencies of the situation; for their power only lasts while the woman is young and attractive, often only while her charm is new, and not dimmed by familiarity; and on many men they have not much influence at any time. the real mitigating causes are, the personal affection which is the growth of time, in so far as the man's nature is susceptible of it, and the woman's character sufficiently congenial with his to excite it; their common interests as regards the children, and their general community of interest as concerns third persons (to which however there are very great limitations); the real importance of the wife to his daily comforts and enjoyments, and the value he consequently attaches to her on his personal account, which, in a man capable of feeling for others, lays the foundation of caring for her on her own; and lastly, the influence naturally acquired over almost all human beings by those near to their persons (if not actually disagreeable to them): who, both by their direct entreaties, and by the insensible contagion of their feelings and dispositions, are often able, unless counteracted by some equally strong personal influence, to obtain a degree of command over the conduct of the superior, altogether excessive and unreasonable. through these various means, the wife frequently exercises even too much power over the man; she is able to affect his conduct in things in which she may not be qualified to influence it for good in which her influence may be not only unenlightened, but employed on the morally wrong side; and in which he would act better if left to his own prompting. but neither in the affairs of families nor in those of states is power a compensation for the loss of freedom. her power often gives her what she has no right to, but does not enable her to assert her own rights. a sultan's favourite slave has slaves under her, over whom she tyrannizes; but the desirable thing would be that she should neither have slaves nor be a slave. by entirely sinking her own existence in her husband; by having no will (or persuading him that she has no will) but his, in anything which regards their joint relation, and by making it the business of her life to work upon his sentiments, a wife may gratify herself by influencing, and very probably perverting, his conduct, in those of his external relations which she has never qualified herself to judge of, or in which she is herself wholly influenced by some personal or other partiality or prejudice. accordingly, as things now are, those who act most kindly to their wives, are quite as often made worse, as better, by the wife's influence, in respect to all interests extending beyond the family. she is taught that she has no business with things out of that sphere; and accordingly she seldom has any honest and conscientious opinion on them; and therefore hardly ever meddles with them for any legitimate purpose, but generally for an interested one. she neither knows nor cares which is the right side in politics, but she knows what will bring in money or invitations, give her husband a title, her son a place, or her daughter a good marriage.
well, then, what is it that in fact tones down the corrupting effects of the husband's power so as to allow for the amount of good that we actually see in many marriages? mere feminine blandishments = (roughly) flirtatious flattery, though very effective in individual instances, don't do much to modify the general tendencies of the situation; because their power lasts only for as long as the woman is young and attractive, often only while her charm is new and not dimmed by familiarity; and on many men they haven't much influence at any time. the real mitigating causes are four in number: (1) the husband's affection for his wife that grows up in the course of time, to the extent that he is capable of it and her character is sufficiently like his to arouse it; (2) their common interests as regards the children ; (3) the wife's real importance to the husband's daily comforts and enjoyments, and the value he consequently attaches to her on his account, which (if he is capable of feeling for others) prepares the way for him to care about her on her account; (4) the influence that most human beings naturally acquire over others who are personally near to them and whom they don't outright dislike. such influence can be exercised through direct entreaties, and through the imperceptible contagion of the woman's feelings and dispositions. these factors and devices, unless counteracted by some equally strong personal influence going in the other direction, can enable a woman to get an altogether excessive and unreasonable degree of command over the conduct of her husband, her superior. through these various means the wife frequently exercises power (sometimes even too much power) over the husband; she can affect his conduct in matters where she may not be qualified to influence it for good and where he would act better if left to his own devices. (but in families, as in states, power is not a compensation for the loss of freedom. her power often gives her what she has no right to, but doesn't enable her to assert her own rights. a sultan's favourite slave has slaves under her, but the desirable thing would be that she should neither have slaves nor be a slave.) by entirely sinking her own existence in her husband, by having no will (or persuading him that she has no will) but his in anything concerning their relationship, and by making it the business of her life to work on his sentiments, a wife can influence and probably pervert her husband's conduct in matters outside the family that she has never qualified herself to judge of, or in which she is influenced by some personal or other bias or prejudice. accordingly, as things now are, the husbands who act most kindly to their wives are as likely to be made worse as to be made better by the wife's influence in all matters extending beyond the family. she is taught that she has no business with such matters, and accordingly she seldom has any honest and conscientious opinion on them; so she hardly ever gets involved in them for any legitimate purpose, but generally for a self-interested one. she doesn't know or care which is the right side in politics, but she knows what will bring in money or invitations, give her husband a title, her son a government job, or her daughter a good marriage.

but how, it will be asked, can any society exist without government? in a family, as in a state, some one person must be the ultimate ruler. who shall decide when married people differ in opinion? both cannot have their way, yet a decision one way or the other must be come to.
how can any society exist without government? in a family as in a state some one person must be the ultimate ruler. when married people differ in opinion, who is to decide? they can't both have their way, but a decision one way or the other must be reached.

it is not true that in all voluntary association between two people, one of them must be absolute master: still less that the law must determine which of them it shall be. the most frequent case of voluntary association, next to marriage, is partnership in business: and it is not found or thought necessary to enact that in every partnership, one partner shall have entire control over the concern, and the others shall be bound to obey his orders. no one would enter into partnership on terms which would subject him to the responsibilities of a principal, with only the powers and privileges of a clerk or agent. if the law dealt with other contracts as it does with marriage, it would ordain that one partner should administer the common business as if it was his private concern; that the others should have only delegated powers; and that this one should be designated by some general presumption of law, for example as being the eldest. the law never does this: nor does experience show it to be necessary that any theoretical inequality of power should exist between the partners, or that the partnership should have any other conditions than what they may themselves appoint by their articles of agreement. yet it might seem that the exclusive power might be conceded with less danger to the rights and interests of the inferior, in the case of partnership than in that of marriage, since he is free to cancel the power by withdrawing from the connexion. the wife has no such power, and even if she had, it is almost always desirable that she should try all measures before resorting to it.
it is not true that in any voluntary association between two people one of them must be absolute master; still less that the law must determine which of them it shall be. the commonest kind of voluntary association other than marriage is partnership in business; and no need has been found for a law dictating that in every partnership one partner shall have entire control over the concern and the others will have to obey his orders. no-one would enter into partnership on terms that would subject him to the responsibilities of an executive while giving him only the powers and privileges of a clerk or salesman. the law never does anything like this in regard to business partnerships; but if it did, this wouldn't pose as much danger to the rights and interests of the inferior as is posed by law governing marriage. a junior business partner would still be free to cancel the power i.e. the absolute power that the senior partner has over him by withdrawing from the partnership. a wife has no such power; and even if she had, it would almost always be desirable that she should avail herself of it only as a last resort.

it is quite true that things which have to be decided every day, and cannot adjust themselves gradually, or wait for a compromise, ought to depend on one will: one person must have their sole control. but it does not follow that this should always be the same person. the natural arrangement is a division of powers between the two; each being absolute in the executive branch of their own department, and any change of system and principle requiring the consent of both. the division neither can nor should be pre-established by the law, since it must depend on individual capacities and suitabilities. if the two persons chose, they might pre-appoint it by the marriage contract, as pecuniary arrangements are now often pre-appointed. there would seldom be any difficulty in deciding such things by mutual consent, unless the marriage was one of those unhappy ones in which all other things, as well as this, become subjects of bickering and dispute. the division of rights would naturally follow the division of duties and functions; and that is already made by consent, or at all events not by law, but by general custom, modified and modifiable at the pleasure of the persons concerned.
it's quite true that things that have to be decided right away, and can't adjust themselves gradually or wait for a compromise, ought to be decided by just one person. but it doesn't follow that this should always be the same person. the natural arrangement is a division of powers between the two, with each being absolute in the executive branch of their own department, and any change of system and principle requiring the consent of both. the division of powers can't and shouldn't be pre-established by the law, because it must depend on individual capacities and suitabilities. if the two persons chose, they might pre-appoint the division of powers in the marriage contract, as financial arrangements are now often pre-appointed. there would seldom be any difficulty in deciding such things by mutual consent, unless the marriage was one of those unhappy ones where everything, including this, becomes a subject of bickering and dispute. the division of rights would naturally follow the division of duties and functions.

a pertinacious adversary, pushed to extremities, may say, that husbands indeed are willing to be reasonable, and to make fair concessions to their partners without being compelled to it, but that wives are not: that if allowed any rights of their own, they will acknowledge no rights at all in any one else, and never will yield in anything, unless they can be compelled, by the man's mere authority, to yield in everything. this would have been said by many persons some generations ago, when satires on women were in vogue, and men thought it a clever thing to insult women for being what men made them. but it will be said by no one now who is worth replying to. it is not the doctrine of the present day that women are less susceptible of good feeling, and consideration for those with whom they are united by the strongest ties, than men are. on the contrary, we are perpetually told that women are better than men, by those who are totally opposed to treating them as if they were as good; so that the saying has passed into a piece of tiresome cant, intended to put a complimentary face upon an injury, and resembling those celebrations of royal clemency which, according to gulliver, the king of lilliput always prefixed to his most sanguinary decrees. if women are better than men in anything, it surely is in individual self-sacrifice for those of their own family. but i lay little stress on this, so long as they are universally taught that they are born and created for self-sacrifice. i believe that equality of rights would abate the exaggerated self-abnegation which is the present artificial ideal of feminine character, and that a good woman would not be more self-sacrificing than the best man: but on the other hand, men would be much more unselfish and self-sacrificing than at present, because they would no longer be taught to worship their own will as such a grand thing that it is actually the law for another rational being. there is nothing which men so easily learn as this self-worship: all privileged persons, and all privileged classes, have had it. the more we descend in the scale of humanity, the intenser it is; and most of all in those who are not, and can never expect to be, raised above any one except an unfortunate wife and children. the honourable exceptions are proportionally fewer than in the case of almost any other human infirmity. philosophy and religion, instead of keeping it in check, are generally suborned to defend it; and nothing controls it but that practical feeling of the equality of human beings, which is the theory of christianity, but which christianity will never practically teach, while it sanctions institutions grounded on an arbitrary preference of one human being over another.
husbands indeed are willing to be reasonable, and to make fair concessions to their partners without being forced to; but wives are not. if wives are allowed any rights of their own, they won't acknowledge rights for anyone else, and they'll never give way on anything unless they are compelled by the man's mere authority to give way on everything. many people would have said this some generations ago, when satires on women were fashionable and men thought it clever to insult women for being what men made them. but it won't be said now by anyone who is worth replying to. the currently fashionable doctrine is not that women are less apt than men are to have good feelings and consideration for their spouses. on the contrary, we are perpetually told that women are better than men, this being said by people who are totally opposed to treating them as if they were as good; so that the saying about women's natural goodness has become a piece of tiresome cant, intended to put a complimentary face on an injury. if women really are better than men in anything, it surely is in self-sacrifice on behalf of their family. but i don't want to stress this at a time when they are universally taught that they are born and created for self-sacrifice. i believe that equality of rights would lessen the exaggerated self-denial that is the present artificial ideal of feminine character, and that a good woman would not be more self-sacrificing than the best man: whereas men would be much more unselfish and self-sacrificing than they are at present because they would no longer be taught to worship their own will as such a grand thing that it is actually the law for another human being. there is nothing that men so easily learn as this self-worship: all privileged persons, and all privileged classes, have had it. the more we descend in the social scale, the more intense it is; and its greatest intensity is in those who aren't, and can't expect ever to be, raised above anyone except an unfortunate wife and children. there are fewer honourable exceptions to this than to almost any other human infirmity. philosophy and religion, instead of keeping it in check, are generally suborned into defending it; and nothing controls it but the practical feeling of the equality of human beings, which is christianity's theory but will never be its practice until it stops supporting institutions based on an arbitrary preference for one human being over another.

there are, no doubt, women, as there are men, whom equality of consideration will not satisfy; with whom there is no peace while any will or wish is regarded but their own. such persons are a proper subject for the law of divorce. they are only fit to live alone, and no human beings ought to be compelled to associate their lives with them. but the legal subordination tends to make such characters among women more, rather than less, frequent. if the man exerts his whole power, the woman is of course crushed: but if she is treated with indulgence, and permitted to assume power, there is no rule to set limits to her encroachments. the law, not determining her rights, but theoretically allowing her none at all, practically declares that the measure of what she has a right to, is what she can contrive to get.
no doubt there are women, as there are men, who won't be satisfied with mere equality of consideration ones with whom there is no peace until their own will or wish is the only one that counts. such people are a proper subject for the law of divorce. they are only fit to live alone, and no human beings ought to be compelled to live with them. but the legal subordination tends to increase the frequency of such characters among women. if the man exercises his whole power, the woman is of course crushed: but if he treats her more permissively and allows her to exercise some power, there is no rule to set limits to how far she takes this. because the law doesn't determine her rights and theoretically allows her none at all, practically declares that she has a right to anything she can contrive to get.

i readily admit (and it is the very foundation of my hopes) that numbers of married people even under the present law, (in the higher classes of england probably a great majority,) live in the spirit of a just law of equality. laws never would be improved, if there were not numerous persons whose moral sentiments are better than the existing laws. such persons ought to support the principles here advocated; of which the only object is to make all other married couples similar to what these are now. but persons even of considerable moral worth, unless they are also thinkers, are very ready to believe that laws or practices, the evils of which they have not personally experienced, do not produce any evils, but (if seeming to be generally approved of) probably do good, and that it is wrong to object to them. it would, however, be a great mistake in such married people to suppose, because the legal conditions of the tie which unites them do not occur to their thoughts once in a twelvemonth, and because they live and feel in all respects as if they were legally equals, that the same is the case with all other married couples, wherever the husband is not a notorious ruffian. to suppose this, would be to show equal ignorance of human nature and of fact. the less fit a man is for the possession of power the less likely to be allowed to exercise it over any person with that person's voluntary consent the more does he hug himself in the consciousness of the power the law gives him, exact its legal rights to the utmost point which custom (the custom of men like himself) will tolerate, and take pleasure in using the power, merely to enliven the agreeable sense of possessing it. what is more; in the most naturally brutal and morally uneducated part of the lower classes, the legal slavery of the woman, and something in the merely physical subjection to their will as an instrument, causes them to feel a sort of disrespect and contempt towards their own wife which they do not feel towards any other woman, or any other human being, with whom they come in contact; and which makes her seem to them an appropriate subject for any kind of indignity. let an acute observer of the signs of feeling, who has the requisite opportunities, judge for himself whether this is not the case: and if he finds that it is, let him not wonder at any amount of disgust and indignation that can be felt against institutions which lead naturally to this depraved state of the human mind.
even under the present law, many married people (in the higher classes of england probably a great majority of them) live in the spirit of a just law of equality. i readily admit this; indeed it is the very foundation of my hopes. laws never would be improved if there weren't many people whose moral sentiments are better than the existing laws. such people ought to support the position i am advocating here, because its only objective is to make all other married couples similar to what they are now. but even persons of considerable moral worth, unless they are also thinkers, are very ready to believe that laws or practices from which they haven't personally suffered any harm don't do harm to anyone, probably do good (if they seem to be generally approved of), and ought not to be objected to. the legal conditions of the marriage tie may not occur to the thoughts of such people once in a year, and they live and feel in every way as though they were legally equals; but they would be making a great mistake if they supposed that the same is the case with all other married couples (or anyway with all in which the husband is not a notorious ruffian). in fact, the less fit a man is for the possession of power the less likely to be allowed to exercise it over anyone with that person's voluntary consent the more he soothes himself with the awareness of the power the law gives him, exercises that power to the utmost point that custom (the custom of men like himself!) will tolerate, and enjoys using the power as a way of enlivening his agreeable sense of possessing it. furthermore: in the naturally most brutal and morally uneducated part of the lower classes, the legal slavery of the wife and something in her merely physical subjection to the husband's will (her role as his instrument) causes him to feel a disrespect and contempt towards her that he doesn't feel towards any other woman or any other human being with whom he comes in contact; and this makes her seem to him an appropriate subject for any kind of indignity.

we shall be told, perhaps, that religion imposes the duty of obedience; as every established fact which is too bad to admit of any other defence, is always presented to us as an injunction of religion. the church, it is very true, enjoins it in her formularies, but it would be difficult to derive any such injunction from christianity. we are told that st. paul said, wives, obey your husbands: but he also said, slaves, obey your masters. it was not st. paul's business, nor was it consistent with his object, the propagation of christianity, to incite any one to rebellion against existing laws. the apostle's acceptance of all social institutions as he found them, is no more to be construed as a disapproval of attempts to improve them at the proper time, than his declaration, the powers that be are ordained of god, gives his sanction to military despotism, and to that alone, as the christian form of political government, or commands passive obedience to it. to pretend that christianity was intended to stereotype existing forms of government and society, and protect them against change, is to reduce it to the level of islamism or of brahminism. it is precisely because christianity has not done this, that it has been the religion of the progressive portion of mankind, and islamism, brahminism, &c., have been those of the stationary portions; or rather (for there is no such thing as a really stationary society) of the declining portions. there have been abundance of people, in all ages of christianity, who tried to make it something of the same kind; to convert us into a sort of christian mussulmans, with the bible for a koran, prohibiting all improvement: and great has been their power, and many have had to sacrifice their lives in resisting them. but they have been resisted, and the resistance has made us what we are, and will yet make us what we are to be.
perhaps we'll be told that religion imposes the duty of obedience on women as every established fact that is too bad to be defended in any other way is said to be required by religion. indeed the church does enjoin obedience in her marriage rituals, but it would be hard to derive any such command from christianity. we are told that st. paul said, wives, obey your husbands, but he also said, slaves, obey your masters. his business was the propagation of christianity, and it wouldn't help him in that to incite anyone to rebel against existing laws. his acceptance of all social institutions as he found them doesn't express a disapproval of attempts to improve them at the proper time, any more than his declaration the powers that be are ordained by god implies support for military despotism as the only christian form of political government. to claim that christianity was intended to freeze existing forms of government and society, protecting them against change, is to reduce it to the level of islamism or of brahminism. it is precisely because christianity has not done this that it has been the religion of the progressive portion of mankind, and islamism and the rest have been the religions of the stationary portions, or rather of the declining portions (because there's no such thing as a really stationary society). throughout the history of christianity there have been plenty of people trying to make it something of the same kind, converting us into a sort of christian moslems with the bible for a koran, prohibiting all improvement. these people have been powerful, and resistance to them has cost many other people their lives. but they have been resisted; the resistance has made us what we are; and will yet make us what we are to be.

after what has been said respecting the obligation of obedience, it is almost superfluous to say anything concerning the more special point included in the general one a woman's right to her own property; for i need not hope that this treatise can make any impression upon those who need anything to convince them that a woman's inheritance or gains ought to be as much her own after marriage as before. the rule is simple: whatever would be the husband's or wife's if they were not married, should be under their exclusive control during marriage; which need not interfere with the power to tie up property by settlement, in order to preserve it for children. some people are sentimentally shocked at the idea of a separate interest in money matters, as inconsistent with the ideal fusion of two lives into one. for my own part, i am one of the strongest supporters of community of goods, when resulting from an entire unity of feeling in the owners, which makes all things common between them. but i have no relish for a community of goods resting on the doctrine, that what is mine is yours but what is yours is not mine; and i should prefer to decline entering into such a compact with any one, though i were myself the person to profit by it.
property rights after what i have said about the general obligation of obedience, it is almost superfluous to say anything about the more specific topic of a woman's right to her own property. the rule is simple: whatever would be the wife's if she were not married should be under her exclusive control during marriage, and similarly for the husband. this still leaves them free to tie up property by settlement, in order to preserve it for children. some people are shocked by the idea of a wife and a husband having separate interests in money matters; this, they sentimentally think, is inconsistent with the ideal fusion of two lives into one. they are (a) right about the ideal, (b) wrong about the practice. speaking for myself: i strongly support (a) community of goods when this results from a complete unity of feeling among the owners, but i have no taste for a (b) community of goods that relies on the doctrine that what is mine is yours but what is yours is not mine; and i would choose not to entire into such a contract with anyone, even if i were the person to profit by it.

this particular injustice and oppression to women, which is, to common apprehensions, more obvious than all the rest, admits of remedy without interfering with any other mischiefs: and there can be little doubt that it will be one of the earliest remedied. already, in many of the new and several of the old states of the american confederation, provisions have been inserted even in the written constitutions, securing to women equality of rights in this respect: and thereby improving materially the position, in the marriage relation, of those women at least who have property, by leaving them one instrument of power which they have not signed away; and preventing also the scandalous abuse of the marriage institution, which is perpetrated when a man entraps a girl into marrying him without a settlement, for the sole purpose of getting possession of her money. when the support of the family depends, not on property, but on earnings, the common arrangement, by which the man earns the income and the wife superintends the domestic expenditure, seems to me in general the most suitable division of labour between the two persons. if, in addition to the physical suffering of bearing children, and the whole responsibility of their care and education in early years, the wife undertakes the careful and economical application of the husband's earnings to the general comfort of the family; she takes not only her fair share, but usually the larger share, of the bodily and mental exertion required by their joint existence. if she undertakes any additional portion, it seldom relieves her from this, but only prevents her from performing it properly. the care which she is herself disabled from taking of the children and the household, nobody else takes; those of the children who do not die, grow up as they best can, and the management of the household is likely to be so bad, as even in point of economy to be a great drawback from the value of the wife's earnings. in an otherwise just state of things, it is not, therefore, i think, a desirable custom, that the wife should contribute by her labour to the income of the family. in an unjust state of things, her doing so may be useful to her, by making her of more value in the eyes of the man who is legally her master; but, on the other hand, it enables him still farther to abuse his power, by forcing her to work, and leaving the support of the family to her exertions, while he spends most of his time in drinking and idleness. the power of earning is essential to the dignity of a woman, if she has not independent property. but if marriage were an equal contract, not implying the obligation of obedience; if the connexion were no longer enforced to the oppression of those to whom it is purely a mischief, but a separation, on just terms (i do not now speak of a divorce), could be obtained by any woman who was morally entitled to it; and if she would then find all honourable employments as freely open to her as to men; it would not be necessary for her protection, that during marriage she should make this particular use of her faculties. like a man when he chooses a profession, so, when a woman marries, it may in general be understood that she makes choice of the management of a household, and the bringing up of a family, as the first call upon her exertions, during as many years of her life as may be required for the purpose; and that she renounces, not all other objects and occupations, but all which are not consistent with the requirements of this. the actual exercise, in a habitual or systematic manner, of outdoor occupations, or such as cannot be carried on at home, would by this principle be practically interdicted to the greater number of married women. but the utmost latitude ought to exist for the adaptation of general rules to individual suitabilities; and there ought to be nothing to prevent faculties exceptionally adapted to any other pursuit, from obeying their vocation notwithstanding marriage: due provision being made for supplying otherwise any falling-short which might become inevitable, in her full performance of the ordinary functions of mistress of a family. these things, if once opinion were rightly directed on the subject, might with perfect safety be left to be regulated by opinion, without any interference of law.
this particular injustice and oppression to women is to the casual observer more obvious than all the rest; and it could be remedied without interfering with any other mischiefs, and there can't be much doubt that it will be one of the first to be remedied. many states in the usa have gone so far as to put into their written constitutions provisions that guarantee women equality of rights in this respect. at least for a woman who has property, this materially improves her situation in the marriage relation by leaving her one instrument of power that she hasn't signed away; and it also prevents the scandalous abuse of the marriage institution in which a man traps a girl into marrying him without a settlement, purely so as to get her money. when the support of the family depends on earnings, the common arrangement in which the man earns the income and the wife superintends the domestic expenditure seems to me in general the most suitable division of labour between them. given that the wife has the physical suffering of bearing children, the whole responsibility of their care and education in early years, and the careful use of the husband's earnings for the general comfort of the family, she does not only her fair share but usually the larger share of the bodily and mental exertion required by their joint existence. if she takes on any further share by having paid employment outside the family, it seldom relieves her from this but only prevents her from doing it properly. and that is very serious, because the care that she now can't take of the children and the household isn't taken by anyone else; the survivors among the children have to grow up as they best can, and the management of the household is likely to be so bad as to cancel much of the monetary value of the wife's earnings. in a just state of things, i don't think it is desirable that the wife should usually contribute by her labour to the income of the family. in an unjust state of things such as we now have, her doing so may be useful to her by increasing her value in the eyes of the man who is legally her master; but against that it also enables him to abuse his power still further by forcing her to work and provide the family's entire financial support, while he spends most of his time in drinking and idleness. if a woman doesn't have independent property, the power to earn is essential to her dignity. but if marriage were an equal contract, not implying the obligation of obedience; if the marriage tie were no longer enforced on those who are oppressed by it, so that a separation on fair terms (i'm not talking here about divorce) could be obtained by any woman who was morally entitled to it; and if she then found all honourable employments as freely open to her as to men, she wouldn't need for her own protection to make this particular use of her abilities during marriage. like a man when he chooses a profession, so a woman who marries can in general be understood to be choosing the management of a household and the bringing up of a family as the first call upon her exertions, for as many years as may be needed for this purpose; and to be renouncing all other objects and occupations that are not consistent with this. on that basis, regular occupations outside the home would be practically ruled out for most married women. but it should be thoroughly possible to adapt the general rules to fit individual cases: if a woman has abilities that are exceptionally adapted to some other occupation, she should be allowed to pursue that despite being married; as long as arrangements are made to fill any gap that this might make in her performance of the ordinary functions of mistress of a family. these things might with perfect safety be left to be regulated by opinion, without any interference of law, once public opinion has been rightly directed on the subject.

chapter iii.
chapter 3: occupations for women outside marriage

it will perhaps be sufficient if i confine myself, in the details of my argument, to functions of a public nature: since, if i am successful as to those, it probably will be readily granted that women should be admissible to all other occupations to which it is at all material whether they are admitted or not. and here let me begin by marking out one function, broadly distinguished from all others, their right to which is entirely independent of any question which can be raised concerning their faculties. i mean the suffrage, both parliamentary and municipal. the right to share in the choice of those who are to exercise a public trust, is altogether a distinct thing from that of competing for the trust itself. if no one could vote for a member of parliament who was not fit to be a candidate, the government would be a narrow oligarchy indeed. to have a voice in choosing those by whom one is to be governed, is a means of self-protection due to every one, though he were to remain for ever excluded from the function of governing: and that women are considered fit to have such a choice, may be presumed from the fact, that the law already gives it to women in the most important of all cases to themselves: for the choice of the man who is to govern a woman to the end of life, is always supposed to be voluntarily made by herself. in the case of election to public trusts, it is the business of constitutional law to surround the right of suffrage with all needful securities and limitations; but whatever securities are sufficient in the case of the male sex, no others need be required in the case of women. under whatever conditions, and within whatever limits, men are admitted to the suffrage, there is not a shadow of justification for not admitting women under the same. the majority of the women of any class are not likely to differ in political opinion from the majority of the men of the same class, unless the question be one in which the interests of women, as such, are in some way involved; and if they are so, women require the suffrage, as their guarantee of just and equal consideration. this ought to be obvious even to those who coincide in no other of the doctrines for which i contend. even if every woman were a wife, and if every wife ought to be a slave, all the more would these slaves stand in need of legal protection: and we know what legal protection the slaves have, where the laws are made by their masters.
women as governors perhaps it will be enough if in the details of my argument i confine myself to functions of a public nature: if i succeed regarding those, it will probably be readily granted that women should be admissible to any occupation where it matters whether they are admitted or not. let me begin by selecting one function their right to which is entirely independent of any thesis about their abilities. i mean the vote, both parliamentary and municipal. the right to share in the choice of those who are to exercise a public trust is utterly distinct from the right to compete for the trust itself. if to vote for a member of parliament one had to be fit to be a candidate, the government would be a narrow oligarchy indeed! to have a voice in choosing those by whom one is to be governed is a means of self-protection that everyone should have, even ones who are for ever excluded from the function of governing; and that includes women. they must be thought fit to have such a choice, because the law already gives to a woman the most important choice of all the choice of the man who is to govern her throughout her life, which is always supposed to be voluntarily made by herself. there's not a shadow of justification for not allowing women the vote under whatever conditions, and within whatever limits, men are allowed it. the majority of women of any class are unlikely to differ in political opinion from the majority of the men of the same class, unless the issue somehow involves the interests of women as such; and in that case women require the votes as their guarantee of just and equal consideration. this ought to be obvious even to those who reject every other doctrine i have been arguing for: even if every woman were a wife, and every wife ought to be a slave, these slaves would stand in need of legal protection, and we know what legal protection slaves have when the laws are made by their masters.

with regard to the fitness of women, not only to participate in elections, but themselves to hold offices or practise professions involving important public responsibilities; i have already observed that this consideration is not essential to the practical question in dispute: since any woman, who succeeds in an open profession, proves by that very fact that she is qualified for it. and in the case of public offices, if the political system of the country is such as to exclude unfit men, it will equally exclude unfit women: while if it is not, there is no additional evil in the fact that the unfit persons whom it admits may be either women or men. as long therefore as it is acknowledged that even a few women may be fit for these duties, the laws which shut the door on those exceptions cannot be justified by any opinion which can be held respecting the capacities of women in general. but, though this last consideration is not essential, it is far from being irrelevant. an unprejudiced view of it gives additional strength to the arguments against the disabilities of women, and reinforces them by high considerations of practical utility.
with regard to women's fitness not only to participate in elections but themselves to hold offices or practise professions involving important public responsibilities: i have already remarked that this consideration isn't essential to the practical question under discussion, because any woman who succeeds in an open profession thereby proves that she is qualified for it. as for public offices: if the country's political system excludes unfit men, it will equally exclude unfit women; and if it doesn't, there is no additional evil in the fact that the unfit persons whom the system admits may be either women or men. thus, as long as it is admitted that even a few women may be fit for these duties, the laws that shut the door on those exceptions can't be justified by any opinion that can be held regarding the abilities of women in general. but though this last consideration is not essential, it is far from being irrelevant. an unprejudiced view of women's competence strengthens the arguments against their subjection, reinforcing them by high considerations of practical benefit.

let us at first make entire abstraction of all psychological considerations tending to show, that any of the mental differences supposed to exist between women and men are but the natural effect of the differences in their education and circumstances, and indicate no radical difference, far less radical inferiority, of nature. let us consider women only as they already are, or as they are known to have been; and the capacities which they have already practically shown. what they have done, that at least, if nothing else, it is proved that they can do. when we consider how sedulously they are all trained away from, instead of being trained towards, any of the occupations or objects reserved for men, it is evident that i am taking a very humble ground for them, when i rest their case on what they have actually achieved. for, in this case, negative evidence is worth little, while any positive evidence is conclusive. it cannot be inferred to be impossible that a woman should be a homer, or an aristotle, or a michael angelo, or a beethoven, because no woman has yet actually produced works comparable to theirs in any of those lines of excellence. this negative fact at most leaves the question uncertain, and open to psychological discussion. but it is quite certain that a woman can be a queen elizabeth, or a deborah, or a joan of arc, since this is not inference, but fact. now it is a curious consideration, that the only things which the existing law excludes women from doing, are the things which they have proved that they are able to do. there is no law to prevent a woman from having written all the plays of shakspeare, or composed all the operas of mozart. but queen elizabeth or queen victoria, had they not inherited the throne, could not have been intrusted with the smallest of the political duties, of which the former showed herself equal to the greatest.
let us start by entirely setting aside all psychological considerations tending to show that any of the mental differences supposed to exist between women and men are only effects of differences in their education and circumstances, and don't indicate any radical difference let alone any radical inferiority of nature. let us consider women only as they actually are or are known to have been, and the abilities that they have already shown in practice. anything that they have done at least proves that they can do that! when we consider how carefully they are all trained away from (rather than towards) any of the occupations or objects reserved for men, it becomes evident that i am taking a very humble ground for them when i base their case on what they have actually achieved, because in this matter negative evidence is worth little, whereas any positive evidence is conclusive. no woman has yet actually produced works comparable to those of homer, aristotle, michelangelo, or beethoven, but it doesn't follow from this that that no woman can attain any such height as they did. the negative fact merely leaves the question uncertain, and open to psychological discussion. on the other hand, it is quite certain that a woman can be a queen elizabeth or a deborah or a joan of arc, because this is not inference but fact. it's an odd thing that the only things the existing law excludes women from doing are the very ones that they have proved they can do! there is no law to prevent a woman from having written all the plays of shakespeare, or composed all the operas of mozart. but if queen elizabeth and queen victoria had not inherited the throne they couldn't have been entrusted with the smallest political duties the sort of duties in which queen elizabeth showed herself to be supreme.

if anything conclusive could be inferred from experience, without psychological analysis, it would be that the things which women are not allowed to do are the very ones for which they are peculiarly qualified; since their vocation for government has made its way, and become conspicuous, through the very few opportunities which have been given; while in the lines of distinction which apparently were freely open to them, they have by no means so eminently distinguished themselves. we know how small a number of reigning queens history presents, in comparison with that of kings. of this smaller number a far larger proportion have shown talents for rule; though many of them have occupied the throne in difficult periods. it is remarkable, too, that they have, in a great number of instances, been distinguished by merits the most opposite to the imaginary and conventional character of women: they have been as much remarked for the firmness and vigour of their rule, as for its intelligence. when, to queens and empresses, we add regents, and viceroys of provinces, the list of women who have been eminent rulers of mankind swells to a great length. this fact is so undeniable, that some one, long ago, tried to retort the argument, and turned the admitted truth into an additional insult, by saying that queens are better than kings, because under kings women govern, but under queens, men.
if anything conclusive could be inferred from empirical data without psychological analysis, it would be that the things women aren't allowed to do are the very ones for which they are specially qualified. their aptitude for government has become conspicuous through the very few opportunities they have been given; whereas in lines of distinction that apparently were freely open to them they have by no means so eminently distinguished themselves. history presents us with far fewer reigning queens than kings, but a talent for ruling has been shown by a higher proportion of the queens than of the kings despite the fact that many of the queens have occupied the throne in difficult periods. it is remarkable too that they have often been distinguished by merits flatly opposite to the imaginary and conventional character of women: they have been noted for their rule's firmness and vigour as much as for its intelligence. when to queens and empresses we add regents and viceroys of provinces, the list of eminent women rulers swells to a great length. this is so clearly the case that someone once tried to run the argument in reverse, turning the admitted truth into an additional insult by saying that queens are better than kings because under kings women govern, but under queens men do.

it may seem a waste of reasoning to argue against a bad joke; but such things do affect people's minds; and i have heard men quote this saying, with an air as if they thought that there was something in it. at any rate, it will serve as well as anything else for a starting point in discussion. i say, then, that it is not true that under kings, women govern. such cases are entirely exceptional: and weak kings have quite as often governed ill through the influence of male favourites, as of female. when a king is governed by a woman merely through his amatory propensities, good government is not probable, though even then there are exceptions. but french history counts two kings who have voluntarily given the direction of affairs during many years, the one to his mother, the other to his sister: one of them, charles viii., was a mere boy, but in doing so he followed the intentions of his father louis xi., the ablest monarch of his age. the other, saint louis, was the best, and one of the most vigorous rulers, since the time of charlemagne. both these princesses ruled in a manner hardly equalled by any prince among their contemporaries. the emperor charles the fifth, the most politic prince of his time, who had as great a number of able men in his service as a ruler ever had, and was one of the least likely of all sovereigns to sacrifice his interest to personal feelings, made two princesses of his family successively governors of the netherlands, and kept one or other of them in that post during his whole life, (they were afterwards succeeded by a third). both ruled very successfully, and one of them, margaret of austria, was one of the ablest politicians of the age. so much for one side of the question. now as to the other. when it is said that under queens men govern, is the same meaning to be understood as when kings are said to be governed by women? is it meant that queens choose as their instruments of government, the associates of their personal pleasures? the case is rare even with those who are as unscrupulous on the latter point as catherine ii.: and it is not in these cases that the good government, alleged to arise from male influence, is to be found. if it be true, then, that the administration is in the hands of better men under a queen than under an average king, it must be that queens have a superior capacity for choosing them; and women must be better qualified than men both for the position of sovereign, and for that of chief minister; for the principal business of a prime minister is not to govern in person, but to find the fittest persons to conduct every department of public affairs. the more rapid insight into character, which is one of the admitted points of superiority in women over men, must certainly make them, with anything like parity of qualifications in other respects, more apt than men in that choice of instruments, which is nearly the most important business of every one who has to do with governing mankind. even the unprincipled catherine de medici could feel the value of a chancellor de lhopital. but it is also true that most great queens have been great by their own talents for government, and have been well served precisely for that reason. they retained the supreme direction of affairs in their own hands: and if they listened to good advisers, they gave by that fact the strongest proof that their judgment fitted them for dealing with the great questions of government.
it may seem a waste of reasoning to argue against a bad joke; but such things do affect people's minds, and i have heard men quote this saying in a manner suggesting that they thought there is something in it. anyway, it will serve well enough as a starting-point for my discussion. so: it is not true that under kings women govern. such cases are entirely exceptional, and weak kings have governed badly through the influence of male favourites as often as of female. when a king is governed by a woman merely because of his love relationships, good government is not probable, though even then there are exceptions. but french history counts two kings who chose to have affairs directed for many years by a woman one to his sister, the other to his mother. one of them, charles viii, was a mere boy, but in giving power to his sister he was following the intentions of his father louis xi, the ablest monarch of his age. the one whose mother was powerful in his reign was louis ix, since canonized and now known as saint louis. he was the best and one of the most vigorous rulers since the time of charlemagne. both of these princesses charles's sister and louis's mother ruled in a manner hardly equalled by any prince among their contemporaries. the emperor charles v, the most politic prince of his time, had as many able men in his service as a ruler ever had, and was utterly unlikely to sacrifice his interests to personal feelings; yet he made two princesses of his family successive governors of the netherlands. both ruled very successfully, and one of them, margaret of austria, was one of the ablest politicians of the age. so much for one side of the joke. as for the other: when it is said that under queens men govern, is this meant to be taken in the same way as the statement that kings are governed by women? is it meant that queens choose the associates of their personal pleasures as their instruments of government? the case is rare even with queens who are as unscrupulous in their love affairs as catherine ii: and we won't find in these rare cases the good government that is supposed to arise from male influence on queens. so if it is true that the administration of a country is in the hands of better men under a queen than under an average king, it must be that queens are better able to choose good men; and women must be better qualified than men both to be sovereign and to be prime minister, because the prime minister's principal business is not to govern in person but to find the fittest people to run every department of public affairs , but actually most great queens have been great by their own talents for government more than by their talent for picking good ministers. they kept the supreme direction of affairs in their own hands; and if they listened to good advisers, that was itself the strongest proof that their judgment fitted them for dealing with the great questions of government.

is it reasonable to think that those who are fit for the greater functions of politics, are incapable of qualifying themselves for the less? is there any reason in the nature of things, that the wives and sisters of princes should, whenever called on, be found as competent as the princes themselves to their business, but that the wives and sisters of statesmen, and administrators, and directors of companies, and managers of public institutions, should be unable to do what is done by their brothers and husbands? the real reason is plain enough; it is that princesses, being more raised above the generality of men by their rank than placed below them by their sex, have never been taught that it was improper for them to concern themselves with politics; but have been allowed to feel the liberal interest natural to any cultivated human being, in the great transactions which took place around them, and in which they might be called on to take a part. the ladies of reigning families are the only women who are allowed the same range of interests and freedom of development as men; and it is precisely in their case that there is not found to be any inferiority. exactly where and in proportion as women's capacities for government have been tried, in that proportion have they been found adequate.
is it reasonable to think that those who are fit for the greater functions of politics can't qualify themselves for the less? we know this: (1) the wives and sisters of monarchs, when they are called on, are found to be as competent as the monarchs themselves in the business of royalty. there is no reason in the nature of things why this shouldn't also be true: (2) the wives and sisters of statesmen, administrators, company directors, and managers of public institutions are capable of doing what is done by their brothers and husbands. if in fact (2) is not true, the reason for that doesn't lie in the nature of things. the real reason why wives etc. of kings have done better than we would expect the wives etc. of business men to do is plain enough. it has to do with how princesses have related to the common run of men; their rank has put them above men to a greater extent than their sex has put them below them. so they haven't been taught that it was improper for them to concern themselves with politics; but have been allowed to feel the wide-ranging interest that is natural to any cultivated human being in the great events occurring around them, events in which they might be called on to take a part. the only women who are allowed the same range of interests and freedom of development as men are the ladies of reigning families, and it is precisely in their case that no inferiority is found. women's capacities for government have been found adequate in every place where they have been tried, and to the extent that they have been tried.

this fact is in accordance with the best general conclusions which the world's imperfect experience seems as yet to suggest, concerning the peculiar tendencies and aptitudes characteristic of women, as women have hitherto been. i do not say, as they will continue to be; for, as i have already said more than once, i consider it presumption in any one to pretend to decide what women are or are not, can or cannot be, by natural constitution. they have always hitherto been kept, as far as regards spontaneous development, in so unnatural a state, that their nature cannot but have been greatly distorted and disguised; and no one can safely pronounce that if women's nature were left to choose its direction as freely as men's, and if no artificial bent were attempted to be given to it except that required by the conditions of human society, and given to both sexes alike, there would be any material difference, or perhaps any difference at all, in the character and capacities which would unfold themselves. i shall presently show, that even the least contestable of the differences which now exist, are such as may very well have been produced merely by circumstances, without any difference of natural capacity. but, looking at women as they are known in experience, it may be said of them, with more truth than belongs to most other generalizations on the subject, that the general bent of their talents is towards the practical. this statement is conformable to all the public history of women, in the present and the past. it is no less borne out by common and daily experience. let us consider the special nature of the mental capacities most characteristic of a woman of talent. they are all of a kind which fits them for practice, and makes them tend towards it. what is meant by a woman's capacity of intuitive perception? it means, a rapid and correct insight into present fact. it has nothing to do with general principles. nobody ever perceived a scientific law of nature by intuition, nor arrived at a general rule of duty or prudence by it. these are results of slow and careful collection and comparison of experience; and neither the men nor the women of intuition usually shine in this department, unless, indeed, the experience necessary is such as they can acquire by themselves. for what is called their intuitive sagacity makes them peculiarly apt in gathering such general truths as can be collected from their individual means of observation. when, consequently, they chance to be as well provided as men are with the results of other people's experience, by reading and education, (i use the word chance advisedly, for, in respect to the knowledge that tends to fit them for the greater concerns of life, the only educated women are the self-educated) they are better furnished than men in general with the essential requisites of skilful and successful practice. men who have been much taught, are apt to be deficient in the sense of present fact; they do not see, in the facts which they are called upon to deal with, what is really there, but what they have been taught to expect. this is seldom the case with women of any ability. their capacity of intuition preserves them from it. with equality of experience and of general faculties, a woman usually sees much more than a man of what is immediately before her. now this sensibility to the present, is the main quality on which the capacity for practice, as distinguished from theory, depends. to discover general principles, belongs to the speculative faculty: to discern and discriminate the particular cases in which they are and are not applicable, constitutes practical talent: and for this, women as they now are have a peculiar aptitude. i admit that there can be no good practice without principles, and that the predominant place which quickness of observation holds among a woman's faculties, makes her particularly apt to build over-hasty generalizations upon her own observation; though at the same time no less ready in rectifying those generalizations, as her observation takes a wider range. but the corrective to this defect, is access to the experience of the human race; general knowledge exactly the thing which education can best supply. a woman's mistakes are specifically those of a clever self-educated man, who often sees what men trained in routine do not see, but falls into errors for want of knowing things which have long been known. of course he has acquired much of the pre-existing knowledge, or he could not have got on at all; but what he knows of it he has picked up in fragments and at random, as women do.
practice versus theory this fact fits with the best general conclusions that our imperfect experience seems to suggest concerning the special tendencies and aptitudes that are typical of women, as women have hitherto been. i don't say  as they will continue to be because (i repeat) it would be presumptuous to make claims about what women are or are not, can or cannot be, by their natural constitution. they have always been kept in such an unnatural state (as regards spontaneous development) that their nature must have been greatly distorted and disguised; and no-one can safely assert that any significant difference would show up between men's and women's characters and capacities if women's nature were left to choose its direction as freely as men's. i'll show later on that even the most undeniable differences that now exist between the sexes may have been produced merely by circumstances, without any difference of natural capacity. still, looking at women as they are known in experience, we can say (with more truth than most generalisations about women possess) that the general bent of their talents is towards the practical. this statement is consistent with all the public history of women, past and present. it is also confirmed by common and daily experience. the mental capacities that are most characteristic of a woman of talent are all of a kind that fits them for practice, and makes them tend towards it. what is meant by a woman's being good at intuitive perception? it means rapid and correct insight into present fact. it has nothing to do with general principles: nobody ever perceived a scientific law of nature by intuition, or reached a general rule of duty or prudence by it. these laws and rules are results of slow and careful collection and comparison of empirical data, and intuitive people men or women don't usually shine in this department, unless they can acquire the needed experience by themselves. that unless condition is crucial, because their so-called intuitive insight makes them especially good at arriving at such general truths as can be collected from their individual observations. so when they happen to be as well provided as men are with the results of other people's experience, by reading and education, women are better equipped than men generally are with what is needed for practical success. (i say happen to be, because it won't be a result of anyone's designs; in respect of the knowledge that tends to fit them for the greater concerns of life, the only educated women are self-educated.) highly educated men are apt to be deficient in the sense of present fact; in the facts they have to deal with they don't see what is really there but what they have been taught to expect. this is seldom the case with women of any ability: their capacity for intuition preserves them from it. when a man and a woman are equal in what experience they have had and in general intellectual level, she will usually see much more of what is immediately before them than he will; and this awareness of the present is the main quality that is needed for practical (as distinct from theoretical) ability. of course there can be no good practice without principles; and i admit another drawback in this aspect of a woman's abilities, namely that her quickness of observation has such a dominant place in her abilities that she is especially apt to form rash generalisations on the basis of her own observation; though she is equally ready to correct those generalisations when her range of data widens. but the corrective to this defect is access to the experience of the human race, i.e. general knowledge, which is exactly the thing that education can best provide. a woman's mistakes are like those a clever self-educated man, who often sees things that are overlooked by men who have been through training-drills, but falls into errors through ignorance of things that have long been known.

but this gravitation of women's minds to the present, to the real, to actual fact, while in its exclusiveness it is a source of errors, is also a most useful counteractive of the contrary error. the principal and most characteristic aberration of speculative minds as such, consists precisely in the deficiency of this lively perception and ever-present sense of objective fact. for want of this, they often not only overlook the contradiction which outward facts oppose to their theories, but lose sight of the legitimate purpose of speculation altogether, and let their speculative faculties go astray into regions not peopled with real beings, animate or inanimate, even idealized, but with personified shadows created by the illusions of metaphysics or by the mere entanglement of words, and think these shadows the proper objects of the highest, the most transcendant, philosophy. hardly anything can be of greater value to a man of theory and speculation who employs himself not in collecting materials of knowledge by observation, but in working them up by processes of thought into comprehensive truths of science and laws of conduct, than to carry on his speculations in the companionship, and under the criticism, of a really superior woman. there is nothing comparable to it for keeping his thoughts within the limits of real things, and the actual facts of nature. a woman seldom runs wild after an abstraction. the habitual direction of her mind to dealing with things as individuals rather than in groups, and (what is closely connected with it) her more lively interest in the present feelings of persons, which makes her consider first of all, in anything which claims to be applied to practice, in what manner persons will be affected by it these two things make her extremely unlikely to put faith in any speculation which loses sight of individuals, and deals with things as if they existed for the benefit of some imaginary entity, some mere creation of the mind, not resolvable into the feelings of living beings. women's thoughts are thus as useful in giving reality to those of thinking men, as men's thoughts in giving width and largeness to those of women. in depth, as distinguished from breadth, i greatly doubt if even now, women, compared with men, are at any disadvantage.
women's minds, then, are drawn to the present, to the real, to actual fact; this can be a source of errors because of what it leaves out, but it is also a useful antidote to the contrary error. where theorising minds primarily and typically go wrong is through having too little of this lively perception and ever-present sense of objective fact. for lack of this they often overlook conflicts between outward facts and their theories, and also lose sight of the legitimate purpose of theorising in the first place, and let their theory-building skills stray into regions that are populated not by real beings, animate or inanimate or even idealised, but by personified shadows created by the illusions of metaphysics or by the mere entanglement of words, and think these shadows are the proper objects of the highest philosophy. for a theorist who is engaged not in collecting empirical data but in working data up by processes of thought into comprehensive truths of science and laws of conduct, hardly anything can be of more value than to do this work with a really superior woman as a companion and critic. there's nothing comparable to this for keeping his thoughts within the limits of real things and the actual facts of nature. a woman's mind is always directed towards dealing with things as individuals rather than in groups, and closely connected with that to having a more lively interest than a man does in the present feelings of persons; and this aspect of her mind determines how she approaches anything that claims to have practical applications. for her the first question is always how will individual people be affected by this? so she is extremely unlikely to put faith in any theory that loses sight of individuals and (a) deals with things as if they existed for the benefit of some imaginary entity, some mere creation of the mind that doesn't (b) boil down to the feelings of living beings. women's thoughts are thus as useful in giving reality to thinking men's thoughts as men's thoughts are in giving breadth and scope to women's. in depth, as distinguished from breadth, i strongly suspect that women, even now, do as well as men.

if the existing mental characteristics of women are thus valuable even in aid of speculation, they are still more important, when speculation has done its work, for carrying out the results of speculation into practice. for the reasons already given, women are comparatively unlikely to fall into the common error of men, that of sticking to their rules in a case whose specialities either take it out of the class to which the rules are applicable, or require a special adaptation of them. let us now consider another of the admitted superiorities of clever women, greater quickness of apprehension. is not this pre-eminently a quality which fits a person for practice? in action, everything continually depends upon deciding promptly. in speculation, nothing does. a mere thinker can wait, can take time to consider, can collect additional evidence; he is not obliged to complete his philosophy at once, lest the opportunity should go by. the power of drawing the best conclusion possible from insufficient data is not indeed useless in philosophy; the construction of a provisional hypothesis consistent with all known facts is often the needful basis for further inquiry. but this faculty is rather serviceable in philosophy, than the main qualification for it: and, for the auxiliary as well as for the main operation, the philosopher can allow himself any time he pleases. he is in no need of the capacity of doing rapidly what he does; what he rather needs is patience, to work on slowly until imperfect lights have become perfect, and a conjecture has ripened into a theorem. for those, on the contrary, whose business is with the fugitive and perishable with individual facts, not kinds of facts rapidity of thought is a qualification next only in importance to the power of thought itself. he who has not his faculties under immediate command, in the contingencies of action, might as well not have them at all. he may be fit to criticize, but he is not fit to act. now it is in this that women, and the men who are most like women, confessedly excel. the other sort of man, however pre-eminent may be his faculties, arrives slowly at complete command of them: rapidity of judgment and promptitude of judicious action, even in the things he knows best, are the gradual and late result of strenuous effort grown into habit.
if it's true that women's existing mental characteristics are valuable aids even in theorising, they are still more important in applying theories to the world. i have explained why women are less likely than men to fall into the error of sticking to a rule in a case whose special features make the rule inapplicable or require it to be specially modified. another of the admitted superiorities of clever women is greater quickness on the uptake; isn't this pre-eminently a quality that fits a person for practice? in action, everything constantly depends on prompt decisions; in theorising nothing does. for those whose business is with the fleeting and perishable with individual facts, not kinds of facts speed of thought is second only to power of thought in importance. if someone dealing with the contingencies of action doesn't have his faculties under immediate command, he might as well not have them! he may be fit to criticise, but he isn't fit to act. now, this is what women are agreed to excel at women and men who are most like women. the other sort of man, however able he may be, arrives slowly at complete command of his faculties: rapidity of judgment and promptness of judicious action, even in the affairs he knows best, are the gradual and late result of strenuous effort grown into habit.

it will be said, perhaps, that the greater nervous susceptibility of women is a disqualification for practice, in anything but domestic life, by rendering them mobile, changeable, too vehemently under the influence of the moment, incapable of dogged perseverance, unequal and uncertain in the power of using their faculties. i think that these phrases sum up the greater part of the objections commonly made to the fitness of women for the higher class of serious business. much of all this is the mere overflow of nervous energy run to waste, and would cease when the energy was directed to a definite end. much is also the result of conscious or unconscious cultivation; as we see by the almost total disappearance of hysterics and fainting fits, since they have gone out of fashion. moreover, when people are brought up, like many women of the higher classes (though less so in our own country than in any other) a kind of hot-house plants, shielded from the wholesome vicissitudes of air and temperature, and untrained in any of the occupations and exercises which give stimulus and development to the circulatory and muscular system, while their nervous system, especially in its emotional department, is kept in unnaturally active play; it is no wonder if those of them who do not die of consumption, grow up with constitutions liable to derangement from slight causes, both internal and external, and without stamina to support any task, physical or mental, requiring continuity of effort. but women brought up to work for their livelihood show none of these morbid characteristics, unless indeed they are chained to an excess of sedentary work in confined and unhealthy rooms. women who in their early years have shared in the healthful physical education and bodily freedom of their brothers, and who obtain a sufficiency of pure air and exercise in after-life, very rarely have any excessive susceptibility of nerves which can disqualify them for active pursuits. there is indeed a certain proportion of persons, in both sexes, in whom an unusual degree of nervous sensibility is constitutional, and of so marked a character as to be the feature of their organization which exercises the greatest influence over the whole character of the vital phenomena. this constitution, like other physical conformations, is hereditary, and is transmitted to sons as well as daughters; but it is possible, and probable, that the nervous temperament (as it is called) is inherited by a greater number of women than of men. we will assume this as a fact: and let me then ask, are men of nervous temperament found to be unfit for the duties and pursuits usually followed by men? if not, why should women of the same temperament be unfit for them? the peculiarities of the temperament are, no doubt, within certain limits, an obstacle to success in some employments, though an aid to it in others. but when the occupation is suitable to the temperament, and sometimes even when it is unsuitable, the most brilliant examples of success are continually given by the men of high nervous sensibility. they are distinguished in their practical manifestations chiefly by this, that being susceptible of a higher degree of excitement than those of another physical constitution, their powers when excited differ more than in the case of other people, from those shown in their ordinary state: they are raised, as it were, above themselves, and do things with ease which they are wholly incapable of at other times. but this lofty excitement is not, except in weak bodily constitutions, a mere flash, which passes away immediately, leaving no permanent traces, and incompatible with persistent and steady pursuit of an object. it is the character of the nervous temperament to be capable of sustained excitement, holding out through long continued efforts. it is what is meant by spirit. it is what makes the high-bred racehorse run without slackening speed till he drops down dead. it is what has enabled so many delicate women to maintain the most sublime constancy not only at the stake, but through a long preliminary succession of mental and bodily tortures. it is evident that people of this temperament are particularly apt for what may be called the executive department of the leadership of mankind. they are the material of great orators, great preachers, impressive diffusers of moral influences. their constitution might be deemed less favourable to the qualities required from a statesman in the cabinet, or from a judge. it would be so, if the consequence necessarily followed that because people are excitable they must always be in a state of excitement. but this is wholly a question of training. strong feeling is the instrument and element of strong self-control: but it requires to be cultivated in that direction. when it is, it forms not the heroes of impulse only, but those also of self-conquest. history and experience prove that the most passionate characters are the most fanatically rigid in their feelings of duty, when their passion has been trained to act in that direction. the judge who gives a just decision in a case where his feelings are intensely interested on the other side, derives from that same strength of feeling the determined sense of the obligation of justice, which enables him to achieve this victory over himself. the capability of that lofty enthusiasm which takes the human being out of his every-day character, reacts upon the daily character itself. his aspirations and powers when he is in this exceptional state, become the type with which he compares, and by which he estimates, his sentiments and proceedings at other times: and his habitual purposes assume a character moulded by and assimilated to the moments of lofty excitement, although those, from the physical nature of a human being, can only be transient. experience of races, as well as of individuals, does not show those of excitable temperament to be less fit, on the average, either for speculation or practice, than the more unexcitable. the french, and the italians, are undoubtedly by nature more nervously excitable than the teutonic races, and, compared at least with the english, they have a much greater habitual and daily emotional life: but have they been less great in science, in public business, in legal and judicial eminence, or in war? there is abundant evidence that the greeks were of old, as their descendants and successors still are, one of the most excitable of the races of mankind. it is superfluous to ask, what among the achievements of men they did not excel in. the romans, probably, as an equally southern people, had the same original temperament: but the stern character of their national discipline, like that of the spartans, made them an example of the opposite type of national character; the greater strength of their natural feelings being chiefly apparent in the intensity which the same original temperament made it possible to give to the artificial. if these cases exemplify what a naturally excitable people may be made, the irish celts afford one of the aptest examples of what they are when left to themselves; (if those can be said to be left to themselves who have been for centuries under the indirect influence of bad government, and the direct training of a catholic hierarchy and of a sincere belief in the catholic religion.) the irish character must be considered, therefore, as an unfavourable case: yet, whenever the circumstances of the individual have been at all favourable, what people have shown greater capacity for the most varied and multifarious individual eminence? like the french compared with the english, the irish with the swiss, the greeks or italians compared with the german races, so women compared with men may be found, on the average, to do the same things with some variety in the particular kind of excellence. but, that they would do them fully as well on the whole, if their education and cultivation were adapted to correcting instead of aggravating the infirmities incident to their temperament, i see not the smallest reason to doubt.
this lofty excitement is usually not a mere flash that leaves no permanent traces and is incompatible with persistent and steady pursuit of an objective. it is typical of the nervous temperament to be capable of sustained excitement that holds out through long-continued efforts. it is what is meant by spirit. it is what makes the high-bred racehorse maintain his speed till he drops down dead. it is what has enabled so many delicate women to maintain the most sublime constancy through lengthy mental and bodily tortures. people with this temperament are particularly well suited for the executive department of the leadership of mankind. they are the material of great orators, great preachers, impressive spreaders of moral influences. you might think that their constitution makes them less suitable for the role of a statesman in the cabinet, or of a judge; and so it would, if it were the case that people who are excitable must always be in a state of excitement. but this is wholly a question of training. strong self-control can grow out of and contain strong feeling, but strong feeling has to be trained to go that way. when it is, it creates not only the heroes of impulse but also the heroes of self-conquest. history and experience prove that the most passionate characters are the most fanatically rigid in their feelings of duty, when their passion has been trained to act in that direction. the judge who gives a just decision in a case where his feelings draw him strongly to the other side gets from that same strength of feeling the fixed sense of the obligation of justice that enables him to win this victory over himself. the thesis that people with excitable temperaments are on average less fit than others for theory or for practice is shown empirically to be false not only of individuals but also of races. the french, and the italians, are undoubtedly by nature more nervously excitable than the teutonic races; their habitual daily emotional life is a richer affair than that of the english, at least. but have they been less great than the english in science, in public business, in legal and judicial eminence, or in war? there is abundant evidence that the greeks of ancient times, like their descendants today, were one of the most excitable of the races of mankind, and they excelled in every kind of human achievement. as an equally southern people, the ancient romans probably had the same native temperament: but the stern character of their national discipline, like that of the spartans, made them an example of the opposite type of national character. the main way in which the strength of their natural feelings showed up was in the intensity with which they worked on replacing their natural temperament with an artificial one. if these cases show what a naturally excitable people can be turned into, the irish celts provide a fine example of what such people are when left to themselves (if they can be said to be left to themselves, given centuries of indirect influence from bad government and the direct influence of catholic teaching and of a sincere belief in the catholic religion). the irish character must be considered as an unfavourable case, i.e. a naturally excitable people who have not as a race achieved anything great. but whenever the circumstances of individual irish celts have been at all favourable, what people have shown greater capacity for the most varied individual excellence? like the french compared with the english, the irish compared with the swiss, the greeks or italians compared with the germans, so also women compared with men may be found on average to do the same things, though with some variety in the details. i don't see the smallest reason to doubt that they would do them every bit as well if their education and development were adapted to correcting instead of worsening the infirmities that their temperament brings.

supposing it, however, to be true that women's minds are by nature more mobile than those of men, less capable of persisting long in the same continuous effort, more fitted for dividing their faculties among many things than for travelling in any one path to the highest point which can be reached by it: this may be true of women as they now are (though not without great and numerous exceptions), and may account for their having remained behind the highest order of men in precisely the things in which this absorption of the whole mind in one set of ideas and occupations may seem to be most requisite. still, this difference is one which can only affect the kind of excellence, not the excellence itself, or its practical worth: and it remains to be shown whether this exclusive working of a part of the mind, this absorption of the whole thinking faculty in a single subject, and concentration of it on a single work, is the normal and healthful condition of the human faculties, even for speculative uses. i believe that what is gained in special development by this concentration, is lost in the capacity of the mind for the other purposes of life; and even in abstract thought, it is my decided opinion that the mind does more by frequently returning to a difficult problem, than by sticking to it without interruption. for the purposes, at all events, of practice, from its highest to its humblest departments, the capacity of passing promptly from one subject of consideration to another, without letting the active spring of the intellect run down between the two, is a power far more valuable; and this power women pre-eminently possess, by virtue of the very mobility of which they are accused. they perhaps have it from nature, but they certainly have it by training and education; for nearly the whole of the occupations of women consist in the management of small but multitudinous details, on each of which the mind cannot dwell even for a minute, but must pass on to other things, and if anything requires longer thought, must steal time at odd moments for thinking of it. the capacity indeed which women show for doing their thinking in circumstances and at times which almost any man would make an excuse to himself for not attempting it, has often been noticed: and a woman's mind, though it may be occupied only with small things, can hardly ever permit itself to be vacant, as a man's so often is when not engaged in what he chooses to consider the business of his life. the business of a woman's ordinary life is things in general, and can as little cease to go on as the world to go round.
suppose for purposes of argument that all this is true: women's minds are naturally more mobile than men's, less able to persist for long in one continuous effort, more fitted for dividing their abilities among many things than for travelling a single path to the highest point that can be reached by it; which is why they have climbed as high as the best men in precisely the endeavours that seem to need most of this absorption of the whole mind in one set of ideas and occupations. still, this difference between women and men can only affect what sort of excellence and achievement each has, not how excellent it is or how practically valuable it is. and the underlying hint in all this that the man's kind of mind is somehow primary, central, optimal, should be challenged. this exclusive working of a part of the mind, this absorption of the whole thinking faculty in a single subject and concentration of it on a single work is this the normal and healthful condition of the human faculties? it hasn't been shown to be so, even in theorising activities. what this concentration gains in specialised projects is lost, i believe, in the capacity of the mind for the other purposes of life; and even in abstract theorising, i am firmly convinced, the mind achieves more by frequently returning to a difficult problem than by sticking to it without interruption. anyway, in practical projects, great and small, the ability to pass promptly from one thing to another without letting the active spring of the intellect lose energy between the two is a much more valuable power than the ability to stick at a problem without any breaks; and this more valuable power is one that women pre-eminently possess because of that very mobility of which they are accused. people have often noticed women's ability to do their thinking in circumstances and at times that almost any man would make an excuse to himself for not even trying; and a woman's mind, though it may be occupied only with small things, can seldom permit itself to be vacant, as a man's mind so often is when he isn't engaged in what he chooses to consider the business of his life.

but (it is said) there is anatomical evidence of the superior mental capacity of men compared with women: they have a larger brain. i reply, that in the first place the fact itself is doubtful. it is by no means established that the brain of a woman is smaller than that of a man. if it is inferred merely because a woman's bodily frame generally is of less dimensions than a man's, this criterion would lead to strange consequences. a tall and large-boned man must on this showing be wonderfully superior in intelligence to a small man, and an elephant or a whale must prodigiously excel mankind. the size of the brain in human beings, anatomists say, varies much less than the size of the body, or even of the head, and the one cannot be at all inferred from the other. it is certain that some women have as large a brain as any man. it is within my knowledge that a man who had weighed many human brains, said that the heaviest he knew of, heavier even than cuvier's (the heaviest previously recorded,) was that of a woman. next, i must observe that the precise relation which exists between the brain and the intellectual powers is not yet well understood, but is a subject of great dispute. that there is a very close relation we cannot doubt. the brain is certainly the material organ of thought and feeling: and (making abstraction of the great unsettled controversy respecting the appropriation of different parts of the brain to different mental faculties) i admit that it would be an anomaly, and an exception to all we know of the general laws of life and organization, if the size of the organ were wholly indifferent to the function; if no accession of power were derived from the greater magnitude of the instrument. but the exception and the anomaly would be fully as great if the organ exercised influence by its magnitude only. in all the more delicate operations of nature of which those of the animated creation are the most delicate, and those of the nervous system by far the most delicate of these differences in the effect depend as much on differences of quality in the physical agents, as on their quantity: and if the quality of an instrument is to be tested by the nicety and delicacy of the work it can do, the indications point to a greater average fineness of quality in the brain and nervous system of women than of men. dismissing abstract difference of quality, a thing difficult to verify, the efficiency of an organ is known to depend not solely on its size but on its activity: and of this we have an approximate measure in the energy with which the blood circulates through it, both the stimulus and the reparative force being mainly dependent on the circulation. it would not be surprising it is indeed an hypothesis which accords well with the differences actually observed between the mental operations of the two sexes if men on the average should have the advantage in the size of the brain, and women in activity of cerebral circulation. the results which conjecture, founded on analogy, would lead us to expect from this difference of organization, would correspond to some of those which we most commonly see. in the first place, the mental operations of men might be expected to be slower. they would neither be so prompt as women in thinking, nor so quick to feel. large bodies take more time to get into full action. on the other hand, when once got thoroughly into play, men's brain would bear more work. it would be more persistent in the line first taken; it would have more difficulty in changing from one mode of action to another, but, in the one thing it was doing, it could go on longer without loss of power or sense of fatigue. and do we not find that the things in which men most excel women are those which require most plodding and long hammering at a single thought, while women do best what must be done rapidly? a woman's brain is sooner fatigued, sooner exhausted; but given the degree of exhaustion, we should expect to find that it would recover itself sooner. i repeat that this speculation is entirely hypothetical; it pretends to no more than to suggest a line of enquiry. i have before repudiated the notion of its being yet certainly known that there is any natural difference at all in the average strength or direction of the mental capacities of the two sexes, much less what that difference is. nor is it possible that this should be known, so long as the psychological laws of the formation of character have been so little studied, even in a general way, and in the particular case never scientifically applied at all; so long as the most obvious external causes of difference of character are habitually disregarded left unnoticed by the observer, and looked down upon with a kind of supercilious contempt by the prevalent schools both of natural history and of mental philosophy: who, whether they look for the source of what mainly distinguishes human beings from one another, in the world of matter or in that of spirit, agree in running down those who prefer to explain these differences by the different relations of human beings to society and life.
the size and quality of brains this is sometimes said: there is anatomical evidence that men's mental capacity is superior to women's: they have a larger brain. in fact, it is by no means established that a woman's brain is smaller than a man's. the size of the brain in human beings, anatomists say, varies much less than the size of the body or even of the head, and the one can't be at all inferred from the other. some women certainly have as large a brain as any man. i know of a man who weighed many human brains and said that the heaviest he knew of was that of a woman. furthermore, the precise relation between the brain and the intellectual powers is a controversial matter that isn't yet well understood. we can't doubt that there is a very close relation. the brain is certainly the material organ of thought and feeling (never mind the ongoing controversy about which mental abilities correspond to which parts of the brain); and it would be anomalous an exception to everything we know of the general laws of life and organisation if brain-size didn't contribute something to mental power. but it would be an equally anomalous exception if the brain influenced thought only through its size. in all nature's more delicate operations of which the physiology of living things are the most delicate, and the workings of the nervous system by far the most delicate of these differences in the effect depend on differences of quality in the physical agents as much as on their quantity; and if we judge by outputs, the level of fineness of quality in the brains and nervous systems of women is higher on average than that of men. never mind abstract difference of quality, which is hard to verify. we know that an organ's efficiency depends not only on its size but on its activity: and we can get a rough measure of this in how energetically the blood circulates through the organ, because the organ's activities and its ability to repair itself depend mainly on blood-circulation. the differences that we see between the mental operations of the two sexes suggest that men on the average have the advantage in the size of the brain, and women in the activity of blood in the brain. that conjecture about difference of brain-organisation, based on analogy, suggests differences in output of kinds that we do most commonly see. mill goes into this a little, along lines already developed. women are quicker in having thoughts and feelings, but less apt to stay with a given line of thought or activity after it has become tiring. in the first place, men's mental operations might be expected to be slower than women's; men wouldn't be as prompt as women in thinking, or as quick to feel. mill suggests (though he doesn't explicitly state it) a comparison with wheels: small ones are easier to start going but also easier to stop. then: this speculation is entirely hypothetical; all it does is to suggest a line of inquiry. i repeat that we don't yet know for sure that there is any natural difference in the average strength or direction of the mental capacities of the two sexes. and this can't be known when the psychological laws of the formation of character have been so little studied and when the most obvious external causes of difference of character are habitually disregarded left unnoticed by the observer, and looked down on with haughty contempt by the prevalent schools of natural history and of mental philosophy. those schools disagree about what the source is of what mainly distinguishes human beings from one another disagree about whether it is material or spiritual but they agree in belittling those who explain these differences in terms of the different ways in which human beings relate to society and to life.

to so ridiculous an extent are the notions formed of the nature of women, mere empirical generalizations, framed, without philosophy or analysis, upon the first instances which present themselves, that the popular idea of it is different in different countries, according as the opinions and social circumstances of the country have given to the women living in it any speciality of development or non-development. an oriental thinks that women are by nature peculiarly voluptuous; see the violent abuse of them on this ground in hindoo writings. an englishman usually thinks that they are by nature cold. the sayings about women's fickleness are mostly of french origin; from the famous distich of francis the first, upward and downward. in england it is a common remark, how much more constant women are than men. inconstancy has been longer reckoned discreditable to a woman, in england than in france; and englishwomen are besides, in their inmost nature, much more subdued to opinion. it may be remarked by the way, that englishmen are in peculiarly unfavourable circumstances for attempting to judge what is or is not natural, not merely to women, but to men, or to human beings altogether, at least if they have only english experience to go upon: because there is no place where human nature shows so little of its original lineaments. both in a good and a bad sense, the english are farther from a state of nature than any other modern people. they are, more than any other people, a product of civilization and discipline. england is the country in which social discipline has most succeeded, not so much in conquering, as in suppressing, whatever is liable to conflict with it. the english, more than any other people, not only act but feel according to rule. in other countries, the taught opinion, or the requirement of society, may be the stronger power, but the promptings of the individual nature are always visible under it, and often resisting it: rule may be stronger than nature, but nature is still there. in england, rule has to a great degree substituted itself for nature. the greater part of life is carried on, not by following inclination under the control of rule, but by having no inclination but that of following a rule. now this has its good side doubtless, though it has also a wretchedly bad one; but it must render an englishman peculiarly ill-qualified to pass a judgment on the original tendencies of human nature from his own experience. the errors to which observers elsewhere are liable on the subject, are of a different character. an englishman is ignorant respecting human nature, a frenchman is prejudiced. an englishman's errors are negative, a frenchman's positive. an englishman fancies that things do not exist, because he never sees them; a frenchman thinks they must always and necessarily exist, because he does see them. an englishman does not know nature, because he has had no opportunity of observing it; a frenchman generally knows a great deal of it, but often mistakes it, because he has only seen it sophisticated and distorted. for the artificial state superinduced by society disguises the natural tendencies of the thing which is the subject of observation, in two different ways: by extinguishing the nature, or by transforming it. in the one case there is but a starved residuum of nature remaining to be studied; in the other case there is much, but it may have expanded in any direction rather than that in which it would spontaneously grow.
people's views about the nature of women are mere empirical generalisations, formed on the basis of the first instances that present themselves, with no help from philosophy or analysis. this is so true that the popular idea of women's nature differs in different countries, according to how women have been shaped by the opinions and social circumstances of the country in question. an oriental thinks that women are by nature peculiarly voluptuous. an englishman usually thinks that they are by nature cold. the sayings about women's fickleness are mostly french. the english commonly remark on how much more constant women are than men. the attitude that inconstancy is discreditable to a woman has been prevalent in england for much longer than in france; besides which englishwomen are in their inmost nature much more subdued to opinion than frenchwomen are. incidentally; englishmen are especially poorly placed to judge what is or isn't natural to women, or to men, or to human beings altogether if they have only english experience to go on; because there is no place where human nature shows so little of its basic structure as it does in england. for better and for worse, the english are further from a state of nature than any other modern people; more than any other people, they are a product of civilisation and discipline. england is the country in which social discipline has most succeeded not so much in conquering as in suppressing whatever is liable to conflict with it. the english, more than any other people, not only act according to rule but feel according to rule. in other countries, the taught opinion or the social requirement may be the stronger power, but the promptings of the individual nature are always visible under it, and often resisting it: rule may be stronger than nature, but nature is still there. in england, rule has largely replaced nature.

i have said that it cannot now be known how much of the existing mental differences between men and women is natural, and how much artificial; whether there are any natural differences at all; or, supposing all artificial causes of difference to be withdrawn, what natural character would be revealed. i am not about to attempt what i have pronounced impossible: but doubt does not forbid conjecture, and where certainty is unattainable, there may yet be the means of arriving at some degree of probability. the first point, the origin of the differences actually observed, is the one most accessible to speculation; and i shall attempt to approach it, by the only path by which it can be reached; by tracing the mental consequences of external influences. we cannot isolate a human being from the circumstances of his condition, so as to ascertain experimentally what he would have been by nature; but we can consider what he is, and what his circumstances have been, and whether the one would have been capable of producing the other.
i have said that we can't now know for sure how much of the existing mental difference between men and women is natural and how much artificial, or whether there are any natural differences at all, or what they are if there are any. but where certainty can't be had, there may be ways of arriving at some degree of probability. the first question to tackle, and one we have the best chance of answering, is: what is the origin of the differences between women and men that we actually observe? i'll explore for the answer to this along the only path by which it can be reached, namely by tracing the mental consequences of external influences. we can't isolate a human being from his social circumstances, so as to learn experimentally what he would have been by nature; but we can consider what his circumstances have been, and what he is, and whether one could have produced the other.

let us take, then, the only marked case which observation affords, of apparent inferiority of women to men, if we except the merely physical one of bodily strength. no production in philosophy, science, or art, entitled to the first rank, has been the work of a woman. is there any mode of accounting for this, without supposing that women are naturally incapable of producing them?
so let us consider the only conspicuous example we can see of apparent inferiority of women to men, apart from the merely physical one of bodily strength. no top-ranking production in philosophy, science, or art has been the work of a woman. can we explain this without supposing that women are naturally incapable of producing them? women in the arts and sciences

in the first place, we may fairly question whether experience has afforded sufficient grounds for an induction. it is scarcely three generations since women, saving very rare exceptions, have begun to try their capacity in philosophy, science, or art. it is only in the present generation that their attempts have been at all numerous; and they are even now extremely few, everywhere but in england and france. it is a relevant question, whether a mind possessing the requisites of first-rate eminence in speculation or creative art could have been expected, on the mere calculation of chances, to turn up during that lapse of time, among the women whose tastes and personal position admitted of their devoting themselves to these pursuits. in all things which there has yet been time for in all but the very highest grades in the scale of excellence, especially in the department in which they have been longest engaged, literature (both prose and poetry) women have done quite as much, have obtained fully as high prizes and as many of them, as could be expected from the length of time and the number of competitors. if we go back to the earlier period when very few women made the attempt, yet some of those few made it with distinguished success. the greeks always accounted sappho among their great poets; and we may well suppose that myrtis, said to have been the teacher of pindar, and corinna, who five times bore away from him the prize of poetry, must at least have had sufficient merit to admit of being compared with that great name. aspasia did not leave any philosophical writings; but it is an admitted fact that socrates resorted to her for instruction, and avowed himself to have obtained it.
the first point is that we don't have enough empirical evidence to support an induction. with a very few exceptions, women didn't begin to try their abilities in philosophy, science, or art until the past three generations. only in england and france have many made the attempt even today. calculating the probabilities, was it to be expected that a mind having the requisites of first rate eminence in theorising or creative work would have shown up during that rather short period of time among the women whose tastes and social situation allowed them to devote themselves to these pursuits? in every kind of activity that there has been time for, women have done quite as much (at all but the very highest ranks in the scale of excellence), and have obtained as many high prizes as could be expected, given the length of time and the number of competitors. this is especially true in the art in which they have been active for the longest, namely literature both prose and poetry. if we go back to the time when very few women even tried, some of those few were highly successful. the greeks always counted sappho among their great poets; and we may well suppose that myrtis, who is said to have been pindar's teacher, and corinna, who five times defeated him in the competition for the poetry prize, must at least have been good enough poets to be compared with that great name. aspasia did not leave any philosophical writings; but it's an acknowledged fact that socrates went to her for instruction and reports that he obtained it.

if we consider the works of women in modern times, and contrast them with those of men, either in the literary or the artistic department, such inferiority as may be observed resolves itself essentially into one thing: but that is a most material one; deficiency of originality. not total deficiency; for every production of mind which is of any substantive value, has an originality of its own is a conception of the mind itself, not a copy of something else. thoughts original, in the sense of being unborrowed of being derived from the thinker's own observations or intellectual processes are abundant in the writings of women. but they have not yet produced any of those great and luminous new ideas which form an era in thought, nor those fundamentally new conceptions in art, which open a vista of possible effects not before thought of, and found a new school. their compositions are mostly grounded on the existing fund of thought, and their creations do not deviate widely from existing types. this is the sort of inferiority which their works manifest: for in point of execution, in the detailed application of thought, and the perfection of style, there is no inferiority. our best novelists in point of composition, and of the management of detail, have mostly been women; and there is not in all modern literature a more eloquent vehicle of thought than the style of madame de stael, nor, as a specimen of purely artistic excellence, anything superior to the prose of madame sand, whose style acts upon the nervous system like a symphony of haydn or mozart. high originality of conception is, as i have said, what is chiefly wanting. and now to examine if there is any manner in which this deficiency can be accounted for.
if we consider women's works in modem times, and contrast them with men's, either in literary or in the fine arts, the inferiority that we can see boils down to one thing a very significant thing namely a lack of originality. not a total lack; for any production that has any substantive value has an originality of its own is a conception of the mind that produced it, not a copy of something else. the writings of women abound in thoughts that are original in the sense of being not borrowed but derived from the thinker's own observations or intellectual processes. but women haven't yet produced any of the great and luminous new ideas that form an era in thought, or any of the fundamentally new conceptions in art that open a vista of possible effects not before thought of, and found a new school. their compositions are mostly based on the existing fund of thought, and their creations don't deviate far from existing types. this is the sort the only sort of inferiority that their works do manifest. there is no inferiority in execution, the detailed application of thought, the perfection of style. in respect of composition and the management of detail, our best novelists have mostly been women; and modern literature doesn't contain a more eloquent vehicle of thought than the style of madame de stael, or a finer specimen of purely artistic excellence than the prose of madame sand, whose style acts on the nervous system like a symphony of haydn or mozart. what is mainly lacking, i repeat, is high originality of conception. let me consider how we might explain this deficiency.

let us remember, then, so far as regards mere thought, that during all that period in the world's existence, and in the progress of cultivation, in which great and fruitful new truths could be arrived at by mere force of genius, with little previous study and accumulation of knowledge during all that time women did not concern themselves with speculation at all. from the days of hypatia to those of the reformation, the illustrious heloisa is almost the only woman to whom any such achievement might have been possible; and we know not how great a capacity of speculation in her may have been lost to mankind by the misfortunes of her life. never since any considerable number of women have begun to cultivate serious thought, has originality been possible on easy terms. nearly all the thoughts which can be reached by mere strength of original faculties, have long since been arrived at; and originality, in any high sense of the word, is now scarcely ever attained but by minds which have undergone elaborate discipline, and are deeply versed in the results of previous thinking. it is mr. maurice, i think, who has remarked on the present age, that its most original thinkers are those who have known most thoroughly what had been thought by their predecessors: and this will always henceforth be the case. every fresh stone in the edifice has now to be placed on the top of so many others, that a long process of climbing, and of carrying up materials, has to be gone through by whoever aspires to take a share in the present stage of the work. how many women are there who have gone through any such process? mrs. somerville, alone perhaps of women, knows as much of mathematics as is now needful for making any considerable mathematical discovery: is it any proof of inferiority in women, that she has not happened to be one of the two or three persons who in her lifetime have associated their names with some striking advancement of the science? two women, since political economy has been made a science, have known enough of it to write usefully on the subject: of how many of the innumerable men who have written on it during the same time, is it possible with truth to say more? if no woman has hitherto been a great historian, what woman has had the necessary erudition? if no woman is a great philologist, what woman has studied sanscrit and slavonic, the gothic of ulphila and the persic of the zendavesta? even in practical matters we all know what is the value of the originality of untaught geniuses. it means, inventing over again in its rudimentary form something already invented and improved upon by many successive inventors. when women have had the preparation which all men now require to be eminently original, it will be time enough to begin judging by experience of their capacity for originality.
let us remember that during all the period in the world's existence and development of civilisation in which great and fruitful new truths could be arrived at by sheer force of intellect, with little previous study and accumulation of knowledge women didn't concern themselves with theorising at all. from the days of hypatia. and in the times when a significant number of women have began to cultivate serious thought, originality has never been easy to achieve. nearly all the thoughts that can be reached by mere strength of basic intellect were reached long ago; and originality in any high sense of that word is now scarcely ever attained except by minds that have undergone elaborate discipline, and are deeply versed in the results of previous thinking. someone remarked regarding the present age that its most original thinkers are those who have known most thoroughly what their predecessors had thought: and this will always be the case. every fresh stone in the structure has to be placed on the top of so many others that anyone who wants to take a share in the present stage of the work has to go through a long climb, carrying up materials. how many women have gone through any such process? mrs. somerville may be the only woman who knows as much mathematics as is needed for making any considerable mathematical discovery; she happens not to be one of the two or three persons who in her lifetime have been associated with some striking advance in mathematics; is this a proof that women are inferior? since economics became a science, two women have known enough of it to write usefully on the subject; countless men have written on economics during the same time of how many of those can we claim more than that they have written usefully? if no woman, so far, has been a great historian, what woman has been learned enough for that? if no woman is a great philologist, what woman has studied sanscrit and slavonic, the gothic of ulphila and the persic of the zendavesta? even in practical matters we all know how little value the originality of untaught geniuses has. it means re-inventing in a rudimentary form something already invented and improved on by many successive inventors. when women have had the preparation that all men now need to be importantly original, then we'll be in a position to begin judging by experience their capacity for originality.

it no doubt often happens that a person, who has not widely and accurately studied the thoughts of others on a subject, has by natural sagacity a happy intuition, which he can suggest, but cannot prove, which yet when matured may be an important addition to knowledge: but even then, no justice can be done to it until some other person, who does possess the previous acquirements, takes it in hand, tests it, gives it a scientific or practical form, and fits it into its place among the existing truths of philosophy or science. is it supposed that such felicitous thoughts do not occur to women? they occur by hundreds to every woman of intellect. but they are mostly lost, for want of a husband or friend who has the other knowledge which can enable him to estimate them properly and bring them before the world: and even when they are brought before it, they generally appear as his ideas, not their real author's. who can tell how many of the most original thoughts put forth by male writers, belong to a woman by suggestion, to themselves only by verifying and working out? if i may judge by my own case, a very large proportion indeed.
no doubt it often happens that someone who hasn't widely and carefully studied the thoughts of others on a subject has through natural intelligence a bright idea which he can suggest but can't prove, but which when matured may be an important addition to knowledge. but justice can't be done to it until someone who does have the required knowledge takes it in hand, tests it, gives it a scientific or practical form, and fits it into its place among the existing truths of philosophy or science. does anyone think that women don't have such ideas? they occur by the hundreds to every woman of intellect. but they are mostly lost for lack of a husband or friend who has the knowledge that enables him to value them properly and bring them before the world; and even when that happens, they usually appear as his ideas, not their real author's. who can tell how many of the most original thoughts put out by male writers belong to a woman by suggestion, to the man only by verifying it and working it out? if i may judge by my own case, a very large proportion indeed!

if we turn from pure speculation to literature in the narrow sense of the term, and the fine arts, there is a very obvious reason why women's literature is, in its general conception and in its main features, an imitation of men's. why is the roman literature, as critics proclaim to satiety, not original, but an imitation of the greek? simply because the greeks came first. if women lived in a different country from men, and had never read any of their writings, they would have had a literature of their own. as it is, they have not created one, because they found a highly advanced literature already created. if there had been no suspension of the knowledge of antiquity, or if the renaissance had occurred before the gothic cathedrals were built, they never would have been built. we see that, in france and italy, imitation of the ancient literature stopped the original development even after it had commenced. all women who write are pupils of the great male writers. a painter's early pictures, even if he be a raffaelle, are undistinguishable in style from those of his master. even a mozart does not display his powerful originality in his earliest pieces. what years are to a gifted individual, generations are to a mass. if women's literature is destined to have a different collective character from that of men, depending on any difference of natural tendencies, much longer time is necessary than has yet elapsed, before it can emancipate itself from the influence of accepted models, and guide itself by its own impulses. but if, as i believe, there will not prove to be any natural tendencies common to women, and distinguishing their genius from that of men, yet every individual writer among them has her individual tendencies, which at present are still subdued by the influence of precedent and example: and it will require generations more, before their individuality is sufficiently developed to make head against that influence.
if we turn from pure theory-building to literature in the narrow sense of the term and the fine arts, there is a very obvious reason why women's literature is broadly an imitation of men's. why is roman literature, as critics proclaim until we are sick of it, not original but an imitation of greek literature? simply because the greeks came first. if women lived in a different country from men, and had never read any of their writings, they would have had a literature of their own. as it is, they haven't created one, because they found a highly advanced literature already created. if the knowledge of antiquity hadn't been in abeyance for several centuries, or if the renaissance had occurred before the gothic cathedrals were built, they never would have been built because the builders would have had models in mind ancient greek temples or renaissance buildings which would have deprived them of the freedom to be original. we see that in france and italy imitation of ancient literature stopped original development even after it had started. all women who write are pupils of the great male writers. a painter's early pictures, even if he is a raphael, are indistinguishable in style from his master's. even a mozart doesn't display his powerful originality in his earliest pieces. what years are to a gifted individual, generations are to a mass. if women's literature is ever to have a different collective character from men's because of differences in their natural tendencies, it will need much more time than it has had so far before it can free itself from the influence of accepted models and guide itself by its own impulses. i don't think that there will turn out to be any natural tendencies common to women that distinguish their highest intellectual capacities from those of men; but even if that is right, every individual woman writer has her own individual tendencies, which at present are still subdued by the influence of precedent and example; and it will require generations more before their individuality is well enough developed to make headway against that influence.

it is in the fine arts, properly so called, that the prima facie
it is in the fine arts, properly so-called, that the prima facie evidence of inferior original powers in women is the strongest, because (it may be said) opinion doesn't exclude them from these but rather encourages them, and in the affluent classes the education of women is mainly composed of training in the fine arts. on the doctrine of averages, we can't reasonably expect to see more than one eminent woman to fifty eminent men; and the last three centuries have not produced fifty eminent male composers either in germany or in italy.

there are other reasons, besides those which we have now given, that help to explain why women remain behind men, even in the pursuits which are open to both. for one thing, very few women have time for them. this may seem a paradox; it is an undoubted social fact. the time and thoughts of every woman have to satisfy great previous demands on them for things practical. there is, first, the superintendence of the family and the domestic expenditure, which occupies at least one woman in every family, generally the one of mature years and acquired experience; unless the family is so rich as to admit of delegating that task to hired agency, and submitting to all the waste and malversation inseparable from that mode of conducting it. the superintendence of a household, even when not in other respects laborious, is extremely onerous to the thoughts; it requires incessant vigilance, an eye which no detail escapes, and presents questions for consideration and solution, foreseen and unforeseen, at every hour of the day, from which the person responsible for them can hardly ever shake herself free. if a woman is of a rank and circumstances which relieve her in a measure from these cares, she has still devolving on her the management for the whole family of its intercourse with others of what is called society, and the less the call made on her by the former duty, the greater is always the development of the latter: the dinner parties, concerts, evening parties, morning visits, letter writing, and all that goes with them. all this is over and above the engrossing duty which society imposes exclusively on women, of making themselves charming. a clever woman of the higher ranks finds nearly a sufficient employment of her talents in cultivating the graces of manner and the arts of conversation. to look only at the outward side of the subject: the great and continual exercise of thought which all women who attach any value to dressing well (i do not mean expensively, but with taste, and perception of natural and of artificial convenance) must bestow upon their own dress, perhaps also upon that of their daughters, would alone go a great way towards achieving respectable results in art, or science, or literature, and does actually exhaust much of the time and mental power they might have to spare for either. if it were possible that all this number of little practical interests (which are made great to them) should leave them either much leisure, or much energy and freedom of mind, to be devoted to art or speculation, they must have a much greater original supply of active faculty than the vast majority of men. but this is not all. independently of the regular offices of life which devolve upon a woman, she is expected to have her time and faculties always at the disposal of everybody. if a man has not a profession to exempt him from such demands, still, if he has a pursuit, he offends nobody by devoting his time to it; occupation is received as a valid excuse for his not answering to every casual demand which may be made on him. are a woman's occupations, especially her chosen and voluntary ones, ever regarded as excusing her from any of what are termed the calls of society? scarcely are her most necessary and recognised duties allowed as an exemption. it requires an illness in the family, or something else out of the common way, to entitle her to give her own business the precedence over other people's amusement. she must always be at the beck and call of somebody, generally of everybody. if she has a study or a pursuit, she must snatch any short interval which accidentally occurs to be employed in it. a celebrated woman, in a work which i hope will some day be published, remarks truly that everything a woman does is done at odd times. is it wonderful, then, if she does not attain the highest eminence in things which require consecutive attention, and the concentration on them of the chief interest of life? such is philosophy, and such, above all, is art, in which, besides the devotion of the thoughts and feelings, the hand also must be kept in constant exercise to attain high skill.
there are other reasons, too, that help to explain why women remain behind men even in the pursuits that are open to both. for one thing, very few women have time for them. this may seem a paradox, but it is an undoubted social fact. (1) the superintending of the family and the domestic expenditure which occupies at least one woman in every family, usually the one of mature years and long experience; unless the family can afford to hire domestic help, opening the door to waste and dishonesty. even when the superintending of a household isn't laborious in other ways, it's a very heavy burden on the thoughts; it requires incessant vigilance, an eye that catches every detail, and it constantly presents inescapable problems to be solved. if a woman has the rank and wealth to be somewhat relieved from these cares, she still has on her shoulders the management of the family's relations with other families its relations with society, as it is called and the less she has to do on the domestic side, the greater becomes the social task: dinner parties, concerts, evening parties, morning visits, letter-writing, and all that goes with them. in addition to all this, society imposes on women, and only on them, the engrossing duty of making themselves charming. a clever woman of the higher ranks finds her talents being exercised almost to the full by her development of graces of manner and the arts of conversation. let us look just at the outward side of the subject. any woman who attaches any value to dressing well (i don't mean expensively, but with taste and awareness of what is naturally and socially appropriate) must give to her own clothes and perhaps those of her daughters an amount of time and thought that would go a great way towards achieving respectable results in art, or science, or literature. and there is another burden. independently of the regular domestic and social duties that are laid on a woman, she is expected to have her time and abilities always at the disposal of everybody. even if a man doesn't have a profession to exempt him from such demands, no-one is offended if he devotes his time to some pursuit that he has chosen; i am busy is accepted as a valid excuse for not responding to every casual demand that may be made on him. are a woman's occupations, especially the ones she chooses, ever regarded as excusing her from any of the demands of society? even her most necessary and recognised duties are barely allowed as exempting her. to be entitled to give precedence to her own business over other people's amusement, she needs an illness in the family or something else out of the common way. is it surprising, then, if she doesn't reach the highest eminence in activities that require unbroken attention and have to be focussed on as the chief interest of life? such is philosophy, and such above all is art, in which besides the devotion of the thoughts and feelings the hand must also be kept constantly at work to attain high skill.

as for moral differences, considered as distinguished from intellectual, the distinction commonly drawn is to the advantage of women. they are declared to be better than men; an empty compliment, which must provoke a bitter smile from every woman of spirit, since there is no other situation in life in which it is the established order, and considered quite natural and suitable, that the better should obey the worse. if this piece of idle talk is good for anything, it is only as an admission by men, of the corrupting influence of power; for that is certainly the only truth which the fact, if it be a fact, either proves or illustrates. and it is true that servitude, except when it actually brutalizes, though corrupting to both, is less so to the slaves than to the slave-masters. it is wholesomer for the moral nature to be restrained, even by arbitrary power, than to be allowed to exercise arbitrary power without restraint. women, it is said, seldomer fall under the penal law contribute a much smaller number of offenders to the criminal calendar, than men. i doubt not that the same thing may be said, with the same truth, of negro slaves. those who are under the control of others cannot often commit crimes, unless at the command and for the purposes of their masters. i do not know a more signal instance of the blindness with which the world, including the herd of studious men, ignore and pass over all the influences of social circumstances, than their silly depreciation of the intellectual, and silly panegyrics on the moral, nature of women.
as for moral as distinct from intellectual differences, it is commonly said that women are better than men. this empty compliment will provoke a bitter smile from every woman of spirit, because it implies that the situation of women is unique: there's no other context in which it is regarded as natural and suitable that the better should obey the worse! if this piece of idle talk is good for anything it is only as men's admission that power corrupts; because that is the only truth that is proved or illustrated by the fact, if it is a fact, that women are better. and it may indeed be a fact, because it is true that servitude, except when it actually brutalises, is less corrupting to the slaves than to the slave-masters. of these two situations: being restrained, perhaps by arbitrary power, being allowed to exercise arbitrary power without restraint, it is the former that is more wholesome for one's moral nature. far fewer women than men commit crimes, it is said, and no doubt far fewer slaves than free men do so. those who are under the control of others cannot often commit crimes, unless commanded by their masters and serving their purposes. the world, including the herd of studious men, blindly ignore and pass over all the influences of social circumstances; and i don't know of any more blatant example of this than men's silly hymns of praise to the moral, nature of women.

the complimentary dictum about women's superior moral goodness may be allowed to pair off with the disparaging one respecting their greater liability to moral bias. women, we are told, are not capable of resisting their personal partialities: their judgment in grave affairs is warped by their sympathies and antipathies. assuming it to be so, it is still to be proved that women are oftener misled by their personal feelings than men by their personal interests. the chief difference would seem in that case to be, that men are led from the course of duty and the public interest by their regard for themselves, women (not being allowed to have private interests of their own) by their regard for somebody else. it is also to be considered, that all the education which women receive from society inculcates on them the feeling that the individuals connected with them are the only ones to whom they owe any duty the only ones whose interest they are called upon to care for; while, as far as education is concerned, they are left strangers even to the elementary ideas which are presupposed in any intelligent regard for larger interests or higher moral objects. the complaint against them resolves itself merely into this, that they fulfil only too faithfully the sole duty which they are taught, and almost the only one which they are permitted to practise.
the complimentary dictum about women's moral superiority might be paired off with the disparaging one about their greater liability to moral bias. women, we are told, can't resist their personal partialities: their judgment in serious affairs is warped by their sympathies and antipathies. even if this is so, it is still to be proved that women are oftener misled by their personal feelings than men are by their personal interests. the chief difference there seems be that men are led from the course of duty and public interest by their concern for themselves, whereas women (not being allowed to have private interests of their own) are led astray by their regard for somebody else. bear in mind also that all the education that women get from society instills in them the feeling that the only duty of care that they owe is to individuals who are personally connected with them, and doesn't introduce them to the ideas even the elementary ideas that are involved in any intelligent concern for larger interests or higher moral objects. the complaint against them resolves itself merely into this, that they fulfill only too faithfully the only duty they are taught, which is also almost the only one that they are allowed to practise.

the concessions of the privileged to the unprivileged are so seldom brought about by any better motive than the power of the unprivileged to extort them, that any arguments against the prerogative of sex are likely to be little attended to by the generality, as long as they are able to say to themselves that women do not complain of it. that fact certainly enables men to retain the unjust privilege some time longer; but does not render it less unjust. exactly the same thing may be said of the women in the harem of an oriental: they do not complain of not being allowed the freedom of european women. they think our women insufferably bold and unfeminine. how rarely it is that even men complain of the general order of society; and how much rarer still would such complaint be, if they did not know of any different order existing anywhere else. women do not complain of the general lot of women; or rather they do, for plaintive elegies on it are very common in the writings of women, and were still more so as long as the lamentations could not be suspected of having any practical object. their complaints are like the complaints which men make of the general unsatisfactoriness of human life; they are not meant to imply blame, or to plead for any change. but though women do not complain of the power of husbands, each complains of her own husband, or of the husbands of her friends. it is the same in all other cases of servitude, at least in the commencement of the emancipatory movement. the serfs did not at first complain of the power of their lords, but only of their tyranny. the commons began by claiming a few municipal privileges; they next asked an exemption for themselves from being taxed without their own consent; but they would at that time have thought it a great presumption to claim any share in the king's sovereign authority. the case of women is now the only case in which to rebel against established rules is still looked upon with the same eyes as was formerly a subject's claim to the right of rebelling against his king. a woman who joins in any movement which her husband disapproves, makes herself a martyr, without even being able to be an apostle, for the husband can legally put a stop to her apostleship. women cannot be expected to devote themselves to the emancipation of women, until men in considerable number are prepared to join with them in the undertaking.
when the privileged make any concession to the unprivileged, it is nearly always because the unprivileged have had the power to extort those changes. this is so much so that no arguments against the subjection of women are likely to be attended to by people in general as long as they can tell themselves that women don't complain of it. that fact certainly enables men to retain their unjust privilege some time longer, but it doesn't make it less unjust. actually, women do complain of the general lot of women; plaintive elegies on that are very common in the writings of women, and were still more so back when the lamentations couldn't be suspected of having any practical objective. but their complaints are like men's complaints about the general unsatisfactoriness of human life; they aren't meant to imply blame or to plead for change. but though women don't complain about the power of husbands, each complains about her own husband, or the husbands of her friends. it is the same in all other cases of servitude, at least at the start of the movement towards liberation. the serfs at first complained not about the power of their lords but only about their tyranny. the commoners began by claiming a few municipal privileges; then they asked to be freed from being taxed without their own consent; but they would have thought it very presumptuous to claim any share in the king's sovereign authority. the only rebellion against established rules that is viewed in that way today is that of women against their subjection. a woman who joins in any movement that her husband disapproves, makes herself a martyr, without even being able to be an apostle, for the husband can legally put a stop to her apostleship. women can't be expected to devote themselves to the emancipation of women until considerable numbers of men are prepared to join with them in the undertaking.

chapter iv.
chapter 4: what good would reform do?

there remains a question, not of less importance than those already discussed, and which will be asked the most importunately by those opponents whose conviction is somewhat shaken on the main point. what good are we to expect from the changes proposed in our customs and institutions? would mankind be at all better off if women were free? if not, why disturb their minds, and attempt to make a social revolution in the name of an abstract right?
there remains a question that is as important as those i have discussed a question that will be asked with the most persistent vigour by opponents whose conviction is somewhat shaken on the main point namely: what good are we to expect from the changes you propose in our customs and institutions? would mankind be better off if women were free? if not, why disturb their minds and try to make a social revolution in the name of an abstract right?

it is hardly to be expected that this question will be asked in respect to the change proposed in the condition of women in marriage. the sufferings, immoralities, evils of all sorts, produced in innumerable cases by the subjection of individual women to individual men, are far too terrible to be overlooked. unthinking or uncandid persons, counting those cases alone which are extreme, or which attain publicity, may say that the evils are exceptional; but no one can be blind to their existence, nor, in many cases, to their intensity. and it is perfectly obvious that the abuse of the power cannot be very much checked while the power remains. it is a power given, or offered, not to good men, or to decently respectable men, but to all men; the most brutal, and the most criminal. there is no check but that of opinion, and such men are in general within the reach of no opinion but that of men like themselves. if such men did not brutally tyrannize over the one human being whom the law compels to bear everything from them, society must already have reached a paradisiacal state. there could be no need any longer of laws to curb men's vicious propensities. astra must not only have returned to earth, but the heart of the worst man must have become her temple. the law of servitude in marriage is a monstrous contradiction to all the principles of the modern world, and to all the experience through which those principles have been slowly and painfully worked out. it is the sole case, now that negro slavery has been abolished, in which a human being in the plenitude of every faculty is delivered up to the tender mercies of another human being, in the hope forsooth that this other will use the power solely for the good of the person subjected to it. marriage is the only actual bondage known to our law. there remain no legal slaves, except the mistress of every house.
this question isn't likely to be asked regarding the proposed change in the condition of women in marriage. the countless instances of suffering, immorality, evils of all sorts that come from the subjection of individual women to individual men are far too terrible to be overlooked. thoughtless or dishonest people who attend only to cases that are extreme or that receive publicity may say that these evils are exceptional; but no-one can be blind to their existence or (often) to their intensity. and it is perfectly obvious that the abuse of the power can't be lessened very much while the power remains. this power is given or offered not to good men or to decently respectable men, but to all men, including the most brutal and the most criminal. the only constraint is that of opinion, and such men are usually unaffected by any opinion except that of men like themselves. the law of servitude in marriage is a monstrous contradiction to all the principles of the modern world, and to all the experience through which those principles have been slowly and painfully worked out. now that negro slavery has been abolished, marriage is the only institution in which a human whose faculties are all in excellent order is delivered up to the tender mercies of another human being, in the hope yes, really that this other will use the power solely for the good of the person subjected to it. marriage is the only actual bondage known to our law. there are no longer any legal slaves except the mistress of every house.

it is not, therefore, on this part of the subject, that the question is likely to be asked, cui bono? we may be told that the evil would outweigh the good, but the reality of the good admits of no dispute. in regard, however, to the larger question, the removal of women's disabilities their recognition as the equals of men in all that belongs to citizenship the opening to them of all honourable employments, and of the training and education which qualifies for those employments there are many persons for whom it is not enough that the inequality has no just or legitimate defence; they require to be told what express advantage would be obtained by abolishing it.
so the question cui bono? is not likely to be asked regarding the reform of the marriage law. we may be told that the evil of such reform would outweigh the good, but there can be no denying that there would be good results. in regard to the larger question, however removing women's disabilities, recognising them as the equals of men in every aspect of citizenship, opening up to them all honourable employments, and allowing them to have the training and education that would qualify them for those employments for many people it isn't enough that this inequality has no just or legitimate defence; they demand to know what definite positive advantage would come from abolishing it. the moral education of males

to which let me first answer, the advantage of having the most universal and pervading of all human relations regulated by justice instead of injustice. the vast amount of this gain to human nature, it is hardly possible, by any explanation or illustration, to place in a stronger light than it is placed by the bare statement, to any one who attaches a moral meaning to words. all the selfish propensities, the self-worship, the unjust self-preference, which exist among mankind, have their source and root in, and derive their principal nourishment from, the present constitution of the relation between men and women. think what it is to a boy, to grow up to manhood in the belief that without any merit or any exertion of his own, though he may be the most frivolous and empty or the most ignorant and stolid of mankind, by the mere fact of being born a male he is by right the superior of all and every one of an entire half of the human race: including probably some whose real superiority to himself he has daily or hourly occasion to feel; but even if in his whole conduct he habitually follows a woman's guidance, still, if he is a fool, she thinks that of course she is not, and cannot be, equal in ability and judgment to himself; and if he is not a fool, he does worse he sees that she is superior to him, and believes that, notwithstanding her superiority, he is entitled to command and she is bound to obey. what must be the effect on his character, of this lesson? and men of the cultivated classes are often not aware how deeply it sinks into the immense majority of male minds. for, among right-feeling and well-bred people, the inequality is kept as much as possible out of sight; above all, out of sight of the children. as much obedience is required from boys to their mother as to their father: they are not permitted to domineer over their sisters, nor are they accustomed to see these postponed to them, but the contrary; the compensations of the chivalrous feeling being made prominent, while the servitude which requires them is kept in the background. well brought-up youths in the higher classes thus often escape the bad influences of the situation in their early years, and only experience them when, arrived at manhood, they fall under the dominion of facts as they really exist. such people are little aware, when a boy is differently brought up, how early the notion of his inherent superiority to a girl arises in his mind; how it grows with his growth and strengthens with his strength; how it is inoculated by one schoolboy upon another; how early the youth thinks himself superior to his mother, owing her perhaps forbearance, but no real respect; and how sublime and sultan-like a sense of superiority he feels, above all, over the woman whom he honours by admitting her to a partnership of his life. is it imagined that all this does not pervert the whole manner of existence of the man, both as an individual and as a social being? it is an exact parallel to the feeling of a hereditary king that he is excellent above others by being born a king, or a noble by being born a noble. the relation between husband and wife is very like that between lord and vassal, except that the wife is held to more unlimited obedience than the vassal was. however the vassal's character may have been affected, for better and for worse, by his subordination, who can help seeing that the lord's was affected greatly for the worse? whether he was led to believe that his vassals were really superior to himself, or to feel that he was placed in command over people as good as himself, for no merits or labours of his own, but merely for having, as figaro says, taken the trouble to be born. the self-worship of the monarch, or of the feudal superior, is matched by the self-worship of the male. human beings do not grow up from childhood in the possession of unearned distinctions, without pluming themselves upon them. those whom privileges not acquired by their merit, and which they feel to be disproportioned to it, inspire with additional humility, are always the few, and the best few. the rest are only inspired with pride, and the worst sort of pride, that which values itself upon accidental advantages, not of its own achieving. above all, when the feeling of being raised above the whole of the other sex is combined with personal authority over one individual among them; the situation, if a school of conscientious and affectionate forbearance to those whose strongest points of character are conscience and affection, is to men of another quality a regularly constituted academy or gymnasium for training them in arrogance and overbearingness; which vices, if curbed by the certainty of resistance in their intercourse with other men, their equals, break out towards all who are in a position to be obliged to tolerate them, and often revenge themselves upon the unfortunate wife for the involuntary restraint which they are obliged to submit to elsewhere.
my first answer is: the advantage of having the most universal and pervading of all human relations regulated by justice instead of injustice. that bare statement will tell anyone who attaches a moral meaning to words what a vast gain this would be for the human condition; it's hardly possible to make it any stronger by any explanation or illustration. all of mankind's selfish propensities, the self-worship, the unjust self-preference, are rooted in and nourished by the present constitution of the relation between men and women. think what it does to a boy to grow up to manhood in the belief that without any merit or any exertion of his own, though he may be the most frivolous and empty or the most ignorant and stolid of mankind by the mere fact of being born a male he is by right the superior of every one of half the human race. that inferior half probably includes some whose real superiority to himself he has daily or hourly occasion to feel! but even if his whole conduct is guided by a woman governess or teacher, if he is a fool he thinks that of course she isn't and can't be his equal in ability and judgment; and if he isn't a fool he does worse he sees that she is superior to him, and believes that still he is entitled to command and she is bound to obey. what effect on his character will this lesson have? and men of the cultivated classes are often not aware how deeply the lesson sinks into most male minds. that is because among right-feeling and well-bred people the inequality is kept out of sight as much as possible especially out of sight of the children. boys are required to be as obedient to their mother as to their father; they aren't allowed to domineer over their sisters, and aren't accustomed to seeing their sisters made subordinate to them; on the contrary, feelings of chivalry towards females are highlighted, while the servitude that requires those feelings is kept in the background. well brought up youths in the higher classes thus often escape the bad influences of the subordination of women in their early years, and experience them only when they arrive at manhood and fall under the dominion of facts as they really exist. such people are little aware, regarding a boy who is differently brought up, of how early the notion of his inherent superiority to a girl arises in his mind; how it grows with his growth and strengthens with his strength; how schoolboys inject it into one another; how early the youth thinks himself superior to his mother, owing her patience but no real respect; and how lofty and sultan-like a sense of superiority he feels over the woman whom he honours by admitting her to a partnership of his life. isn't it obvious that all this perverts the whole manner of existence of the man, both as an individual and as a social being? it matches a hereditary king's feeling that he is excellent above others because he was born a king, or a noble because he was born a noble. the relation between husband and wife is like that between lord and vassal, except that the wife is held to more unlimited obedience than the vassal was. the vassal's character may have been affected for better and for worse by his subordination, but it is obvious that the lord's character was affected greatly for the worse. if he came to believe that his vassals were really superior to himself, or to feel that he was given command over people as good as himself, through no merits or labours of his own but merely for having taken the trouble to be born, still the situation will have harmed his character. the self-worship of the monarch or of the feudal lord is matched by the self-worship of the male. anyone who grows up from childhood with unearned distinctions is bound to become conceited and self-congratulatory about them, this being the worst sort of pride. and when the feeling of being raised above the whole of the other sex is combined with personal authority over one woman, the situation may be educational in either of two ways. (1) to men whose strongest points of character are conscience and affection, the marriage may be a school of conscientious and affectionate gentleness and patience, but (2) to men of a different sort it will be a regularly constituted college for training them in arrogance and overbearingness.

the example afforded, and the education given to the sentiments, by laying the foundation of domestic existence upon a relation contradictory to the first principles of social justice, must, from the very nature of man, have a perverting influence of such magnitude, that it is hardly possible with our present experience to raise our imaginations to the conception of so great a change for the better as would be made by its removal. all that education and civilization are doing to efface the influences on character of the law of force, and replace them by those of justice, remains merely on the surface, as long as the citadel of the enemy is not attacked. the principle of the modern movement in morals and politics, is that conduct, and conduct alone, entitles to respect: that not what men are, but what they do, constitutes their claim to deference; that, above all, merit, and not birth, is the only rightful claim to power and authority. if no authority, not in its nature temporary, were allowed to one human being over another, society would not be employed in building up propensities with one hand which it has to curb with the other. the child would really, for the first time in man's existence on earth, be trained in the way he should go, and when he was old there would be a chance that he would not depart from it. but so long as the right of the strong to power over the weak rules in the very heart of society, the attempt to make the equal right of the weak the principle of its outward actions will always be an uphill struggle; for the law of justice, which is also that of christianity, will never get possession of men's inmost sentiments; they will be working against it, even when bending to it.
basing domestic existence on a relation that conflicts with the first principles of social justice think about the example this sets and the education that it gives to the sentiments! the very nature of man ensures that it will have such an enormous perverting influence that we can hardly even imagine the enormous improvement that would come about if the unjust basis for marriage were removed. everything that education and civilisation are doing to erase the influences on character of the law of force, and replace them by influences of the law of justice, remains merely on the surface as long as the enemy's stronghold is not attacked. the principle of the modern movement in morals and politics is that what entitles someone to respect is his conduct and nothing else; that men's claim to deference comes not from what they are but from what they do; that (above all) the only rightful claim to power and authority comes from merit, not birth. if no human being were given permanent authority over any other, society wouldn't be employed in building up with one hand character-traits that it has to curb with the other. for the first time in man's existence on earth, the child would really be trained in the way he should go, and when he grew up there would be a chance of his staying on that path. but so long as the right of the strong to have power over the weak rules in the very heart of society, the attempt to get people's conduct to be guided by the principle of equal rights for the weak will always be an uphill struggle.

the second benefit to be expected from giving to women the free use of their faculties, by leaving them the free choice of their employments, and opening to them the same field of occupation and the same prizes and encouragements as to other human beings, would be that of doubling the mass of mental faculties available for the higher service of humanity. where there is now one person qualified to benefit mankind and promote the general improvement, as a public teacher, or an administrator of some branch of public or social affairs, there would then be a chance of two. mental superiority of any kind is at present everywhere so much below the demand; there is such a deficiency of persons competent to do excellently anything which it requires any considerable amount of ability to do; that the loss to the world, by refusing to make use of one-half of the whole quantity of talent it possesses, is extremely serious. it is true that this amount of mental power is not totally lost. much of it is employed, and would in any case be employed, in domestic management, and in the few other occupations open to women; and from the remainder indirect benefit is in many individual cases obtained, through the personal influence of individual women over individual men. but these benefits are partial; their range is extremely circumscribed; and if they must be admitted, on the one hand, as a deduction from the amount of fresh social power that would be acquired by giving freedom to one-half of the whole sum of human intellect, there must be added, on the other, the benefit of the stimulus that would be given to the intellect of men by the competition; or (to use a more true expression) by the necessity that would be imposed on them of deserving precedency before they could expect to obtain it.
doubling the brain pool the second benefit to be expected from giving to women the free use of their abilities by leaving them free to choose their employments and opening up to them the same range of occupation and the same rewards and encouragements as other human beings have, would be doubling the supply of abilities available for the higher service of humanity. where there is now one person qualified to benefit mankind as a public teacher or an administrator of some branch of public or social affairs, there would then be a chance of two. as things now stand, there is a terrific shortage of people who are competent to do excellently anything that needs any significant amount of ability to do; so that the world suffers a serious loss by refusing to make use of half the talent it possesses. it's true that this amount of mental power isn't totally lost: much of it is employed, and would in any case be employed, in domestic management and in the few other occupations open to women; and the personal influence of individual women over individual men brings some indirect benefit to other activities. but these benefits are partial; their range is extremely narrow; and if you insist on deducting them from the total amount of fresh social power that would be gained by liberating women, then you must add to that total the benefit of the stimulus that men's intellects would get from the competition posed by liberated women.

this great accession to the intellectual power of the species, and to the amount of intellect available for the good management of its affairs, would be obtained, partly, through the better and more complete intellectual education of women, which would then improve pari passu with that of men. women in general would be brought up equally capable of understanding business, public affairs, and the higher matters of speculation, with men in the same class of society; and the select few of the one as well as of the other sex, who were qualified not only to comprehend what is done or thought by others, but to think or do something considerable themselves, would meet with the same facilities for improving and training their capacities in the one sex as in the other. in this way, the widening of the sphere of action for women would operate for good, by raising their education to the level of that of men, and making the one participate in all improvements made in the other. but independently of this, the mere breaking down of the barrier would of itself have an educational virtue of the highest worth. the mere getting rid of the idea that all the wider subjects of thought and action, all the things which are of general and not solely of private interest, are men's business, from which women are to be warned off positively interdicted from most of it, coldly tolerated in the little which is allowed them the mere consciousness a woman would then have of being a human being like any other, entitled to choose her pursuits, urged or invited by the same inducements as any one else to interest herself in whatever is interesting to human beings, entitled to exert the share of influence on all human concerns which belongs to an individual opinion, whether she attempted actual participation in them or not this alone would effect an immense expansion of the faculties of women, as well as enlargement of the range of their moral sentiments.
this great gain for the intellectual power of our species would come partly through better and more complete intellectual education of women, which would then improve in step with the improvement of men's. women in general would be brought up with the same ability to understand business, public affairs, and the higher matters of theorising as men in the same class of society; and the select few of either sex who were qualified not only to understand the work and thought of others but to think or do something considerable themselves would get the same help in improving and training their capacities. in this way, the widening of women's sphere of action would operate for good, by raising their education to the level of men's and making it share in all improvements made men's education. but independently of all this, merely breaking down the barrier would have an educational virtue of the highest worth. the mere getting rid of the idea that all the wider subjects of thought and action, all the things that are of general and not solely of private interest, are men's business from which women are to be warned off positively debarred from most of it and coldly tolerated in the little that is allowed them the mere consciousness a woman would then have of being a human being like any other, entitled to choose her pursuits, urged or invited to interest herself in whatever is interesting to human beings, entitled to have her opinion (like any other) taken account of in human concerns, whether or not she tried to participate in them this alone would enormously expand women's faculties while also broadening the range of their moral sentiments.

besides the addition to the amount of individual talent available for the conduct of human affairs, which certainly are not at present so abundantly provided in that respect that they can afford to dispense with one-half of what nature proffers; the opinion of women would then possess a more beneficial, rather than a greater, influence upon the general mass of human belief and sentiment. i say a more beneficial, rather than a greater influence; for the influence of women over the general tone of opinion has always, or at least from the earliest known period, been very considerable. the influence of mothers on the early character of their sons, and the desire of young men to recommend themselves to young women, have in all recorded times been important agencies in the formation of character, and have determined some of the chief steps in the progress of civilization. even in the homeric age,  towards the   is an acknowledged and powerful motive of action in the great hector. the moral influence of women has had two modes of operation. first, it has been a softening influence. those who were most liable to be the victims of violence, have naturally tended as much as they could towards limiting its sphere and mitigating its excesses. those who were not taught to fight, have naturally inclined in favour of any other mode of settling differences rather than that of fighting. in general, those who have been the greatest sufferers by the indulgence of selfish passion, have been the most earnest supporters of any moral law which offered a means of bridling passion. women were powerfully instrumental in inducing the northern conquerors to adopt the creed of christianity, a creed so much more favourable to women than any that preceded it. the conversion of the anglo-saxons and of the franks may be said to have been begun by the wives of ethelbert and clovis. the other mode in which the effect of women's opinion has been conspicuous, is by giving a powerful stimulus to those qualities in men, which, not being themselves trained in, it was necessary for them that they should find in their protectors. courage, and the military virtues generally, have at all times been greatly indebted to the desire which men felt of being admired by women: and the stimulus reaches far beyond this one class of eminent qualities, since, by a very natural effect of their position, the best passport to the admiration and favour of women has always been to be thought highly of by men. from the combination of the two kinds of moral influence thus exercised by women, arose the spirit of chivalry: the peculiarity of which is, to aim at combining the highest standard of the warlike qualities with the cultivation of a totally different class of virtues those of gentleness, generosity, and self-abnegation, towards the non-military and defenceless classes generally, and a special submission and worship directed towards women; who were distinguished from the other defenceless classes by the high rewards which they had it in their power voluntarily to bestow on those who endeavoured to earn their favour, instead of extorting their subjection. though the practice of chivalry fell even more sadly short of its theoretic standard than practice generally falls below theory, it remains one of the most precious monuments of the moral history of our race; as a remarkable instance of a concerted and organized attempt by a most disorganized and distracted society, to raise up and carry into practice a moral ideal greatly in advance of its social condition and institutions; so much so as to have been completely frustrated in the main object, yet never entirely inefficacious, and which has left a most sensible, and for the most part a highly valuable impress on the ideas and feelings of all subsequent times.
the moral influence of women: chivalry so the liberation of women would double the amount of individual talent available for the conduct of human affairs, which certainly aren't at present so rich in able guidance that they can afford to do without half of what nature offers! the result of that would be that women's opinions would have a more beneficial influence than they now do on the general mass of human belief and sentiment. a more beneficial rather than a greater influence? yes, because women's influence over the general tone of opinion has always or at least from the earliest known period been very considerable. mothers influence on the early character of their sons, and the desire of young men to be liked by young women, have throughout history been important factors in the formation of character, and have determined some of the chief steps in the progress of civilisation. even in the homeric age, the great hector acknowledged being powerfully motivated by his concern for how he would appear to the trojan women. the moral influence of women has worked in two ways. (i) it has been a softening influence. those who were most liable to be the victims of violence have naturally tended as much as they could towards limiting its scope and cutting back its excesses. those who were not taught to fight have naturally tended to favour any way of settling differences other than fighting. in general, those who have suffered most from others giving free rein to their selfish passions have naturally been the most earnest supporters of any moral law that offered a way of controlling passion. women were powerfully instrumental in inducing the northern conquerors to adopt the creed of christianity, a creed so much more favourable to women than any that preceded it. the conversion of the anglo-saxons and of the franks may be said to have been begun by the wives of ethelbert and clovis. (2) women's opinions have conspicuously given a powerful stimulus to the qualities in men that women needed their protectors to have because they weren't themselves trained in them. courage and the other military virtues have always been greatly indebted to men's wish to be admired by women; and this mechanism works for far more than just this one class of eminent qualities, because being thought highly of by men has always been the best passport to the admiration and favour of women. the combination of (1-2) those two kinds of moral influence by women gave birth to the spirit of chivalry, the special feature of which is that it aims at combining the highest standard of (2) the warlike qualities with (1) the development of gentleness, generosity, and self-denial towards the non-military and defenseless classes generally, with a special submission and worship directed towards women. what distinguished women from the other defenceless classes was their power to give high rewards to those who tried to earn their favour rather than forcing them into obedience. the practice of chivalry fell sadly short of its theoretical standard even more than practice generally falls below theory! and yet it remains one of the most precious monuments of humanity's moral history. it was a remarkable example of an organised joint effort by a most disorganised and distracted society to raise up and act on a moral ideal greatly in advance of its social condition and institutions. it was indeed so far in advance that it was completely frustrated in the main objective; and yet it was never entirely ineffective, and has left its mark a very detectable and (for the most part) highly valuable mark on the ideas and feelings of all subsequent times.

the chivalrous ideal is the acme of the influence of women's sentiments on the moral cultivation of mankind: and if women are to remain in their subordinate situation, it were greatly to be lamented that the chivalrous standard should have passed away, for it is the only one at all capable of mitigating the demoralizing influences of that position. but the changes in the general state of the species rendered inevitable the substitution of a totally different ideal of morality for the chivalrous one. chivalry was the attempt to infuse moral elements into a state of society in which everything depended for good or evil on individual prowess, under the softening influences of individual delicacy and generosity. in modern societies, all things, even in the military department of affairs, are decided, not by individual effort, but by the combined operations of numbers; while the main occupation of society has changed from fighting to business, from military to industrial life. the exigencies of the new life are no more exclusive of the virtues of generosity than those of the old, but it no longer entirely depends on them. the main foundations of the moral life of modern times must be justice and prudence; the respect of each for the rights of every other, and the ability of each to take care of himself. chivalry left without legal check all forms of wrong which reigned unpunished throughout society; it only encouraged a few to do right in preference to wrong, by the direction it gave to the instruments of praise and admiration. but the real dependence of morality must always be upon its penal sanctions its power to deter from evil. the security of society cannot rest on merely rendering honour to right, a motive so comparatively weak in all but a few, and which on very many does not operate at all. modern society is able to repress wrong through all departments of life, by a fit exertion of the superior strength which civilization has given it, and thus to render the existence of the weaker members of society (no longer defenceless but protected by law) tolerable to them, without reliance on the chivalrous feelings of those who are in a position to tyrannize. the beauties and graces of the chivalrous character are still what they were, but the rights of the weak, and the general comfort of human life, now rest on a far surer and steadier support; or rather, they do so in every relation of life except the conjugal.
the chivalrous ideal is the high point of women's influence on the moral development of mankind; and if women are to remain in subjection it is lamentable that the chivalrous standard has passed away, because it's the only standard that has any power to alleviate the demoralising influences of the subjection of women. but changes in the general state of mankind made it inevitable that the chivalrous ideal of morality would be replaced by a totally different one. chivalry tried to infuse moral elements into a state of society in which everything depended for good or evil on individual strength and skill, under the softening influences of individual delicacy and generosity. in modern societies everything is settled not by individual effort but by the combined operations of many people, and society's main occupation has changed from fighting to business, from military to industrial life. the demands of this new life don't rule out the virtues of generosity, any more than the demands of the old life did, but the new life doesn't entirely depend on them as the old life did. the main foundations of the moral life of modern times must be justice: each person's respect for the rights of every other person, and prudence: each person's ability to take care of himself. chivalry didn't erect legal barriers to any of the forms of wrong that reigned unpunished throughout society; the most it achieved in that line was to steer the instruments of praise and admiration in such a way as to encourage a few men to do right in preference to wrong. but what morality must really depend on are its penal sanctions its power to deter people from acting badly. the security of society cannot rest merely on honouring right behaviour: that is a relatively weak motive in most people, and in some it has no force at all. modern society can repress all kinds of wrong conduct by an appropriate use of the superior strength that civilisation has given it, and thus make life tolerable for the weaker members of society (who are no longer defenseless but protected by law), doing this without having to rely on the chivalrous feelings of those who are in a position to tyrannise. the beauties and graces of the chivalrous character are still what they always were, but the rights of the weak and the general comfort of human life now rest on a far surer and steadier support. or, rather, they do so in every relation of life except the marriage relation.

at present the moral influence of women is no less real, but it is no longer of so marked and definite a character: it has more nearly merged in the general influence of public opinion. both through the contagion of sympathy, and through the desire of men to shine in the eyes of women, their feelings have great effect in keeping alive what remains of the chivalrous ideal in fostering the sentiments and continuing the traditions of spirit and generosity. in these points of character, their standard is higher than that of men; in the quality of justice, somewhat lower. as regards the relations of private life it may be said generally, that their influence is, on the whole, encouraging to the softer virtues, discouraging to the sterner: though the statement must be taken with all the modifications dependent on individual character. in the chief of the greater trials to which virtue is subject in the concerns of life the conflict between interest and principle the tendency of women's influence is of a very mixed character. when the principle involved happens to be one of the very few which the course of their religious or moral education has strongly impressed upon themselves, they are potent auxiliaries to virtue: and their husbands and sons are often prompted by them to acts of abnegation which they never would have been capable of without that stimulus. but, with the present education and position of women, the moral principles which have been impressed on them cover but a comparatively small part of the field of virtue, and are, moreover, principally negative; forbidding particular acts, but having little to do with the general direction of the thoughts and purposes. i am afraid it must be said, that disinterestedness in the general conduct of life the devotion of the energies to purposes which hold out no promise of private advantages to the family is very seldom encouraged or supported by women's influence. it is small blame to them that they discourage objects of which they have not learnt to see the advantage, and which withdraw their men from them, and from the interests of the family. but the consequence is that women's influence is often anything but favourable to public virtue.
the moral influence of women: charity the moral influence of women these days is just as real as it used to be, but it is no longer so marked and definite: it has moved nearer to being merged in the general influence of public opinion. both through the contagion of sympathy, and through men's wish to shine in the eyes of women, the feelings of women have great effect in keeping alive what remains of the chivalrous ideal in encouraging the feelings and continuing the traditions and spirit of generosity. in these aspects of character, women's standard is higher than men's; in the quality of justice, it is somewhat lower. as regards the relations of private life, the influence of women is broadly speaking, but with some individual exceptions encouraging to the softer virtues, discouraging to the sterner ones. virtue's biggest trials in the concerns of life involve the conflict between interest and principle; and women's influence in these is of a very mixed character. when the principle involved happens to be one of the very few that women's religious or moral education has strongly impressed on them, they are powerful aids to virtue; and their husbands and sons are often prompted by them to acts of self-denial that they couldn't have performed without that stimulus. but the moral principles that have been impressed on women, given their present education and position, cover only a small proportion of the field of virtue, and they are principally negative forbidding particular acts but having little to do with the positive direction of thoughts and purposes. i'm afraid it must be said that women's influence does little to encourage or support the devotion of the energies to purposes that don't promise private advantages to the family. it is small blame to them that they discourage projects of which they haven't learnt to see the advantage, and which take their men away from them and from the interests of the family. but the consequence is that women's influence is often anything but favourable to public virtue.

women have, however, some share of influence in giving the tone to public moralities since their sphere of action has been a little widened, and since a considerable number of them have occupied themselves practically in the promotion of objects reaching beyond their own family and household. the influence of women counts for a great deal in two of the most marked features of modern european life its aversion to war, and its addiction to philanthropy. excellent characteristics both; but unhappily, if the influence of women is valuable in the encouragement it gives to these feelings in general, in the particular applications the direction it gives to them is at least as often mischievous as useful. in the philanthropic department more particularly, the two provinces chiefly cultivated by women are religious proselytism and charity. religious proselytism at home, is but another word for embittering of religious animosities: abroad, it is usually a blind running at an object, without either knowing or heeding the fatal mischiefs fatal to the religious object itself as well as to all other desirable objects which may be produced by the means employed. as for charity, it is a matter in which the immediate effect on the persons directly concerned, and the ultimate consequence to the general good, are apt to be at complete war with one another: while the education given to women an education of the sentiments rather than of the understanding and the habit inculcated by their whole life, of looking to immediate effects on persons, and not to remote effects on classes of persons make them both unable to see, and unwilling to admit, the ultimate evil tendency of any form of charity or philanthropy which commends itself to their sympathetic feelings. the great and continually increasing mass of unenlightened and shortsighted benevolence, which, taking the care of people's lives out of their own hands, and relieving them from the disagreeable consequences of their own acts, saps the very foundations of the self-respect, self-help, and self-control which are the essential conditions both of individual prosperity and of social virtue this waste of resources and of benevolent feelings in doing harm instead of good, is immensely swelled by women's contributions, and stimulated by their influence. not that this is a mistake likely to be made by women, where they have actually the practical management of schemes of beneficence. it sometimes happens that women who administer public charities with that insight into present fact, and especially into the minds and feelings of those with whom they are in immediate contact, in which women generally excel men recognise in the clearest manner the demoralizing influence of the alms given or the help afforded, and could give lessons on the subject to many a male political economist. but women who only give their money, and are not brought face to face with the effects it produces, how can they be expected to foresee them? a woman born to the present lot of women, and content with it, how should she appreciate the value of self-dependence? she is not self-dependent; she is not taught self-dependence; her destiny is to receive everything from others, and why should what is good enough for her be bad for the poor? her familiar notions of good are of blessings descending from a superior. she forgets that she is not free, and that the poor are; that if what they need is given to them unearned, they cannot be compelled to earn it: that everybody cannot be taken care of by everybody, but there must be some motive to induce people to take care of themselves; and that to be helped to help themselves, if they are physically capable of it, is the only charity which proves to be charity in the end.
but they do today have some influence in setting the tone for public moralities; that has been the case since their sphere of action has been a little widened and a good many of them have worked to promote objectives that stretch beyond their own family and household. the influence of women counts for a great deal in two of the most marked features of modern european life its aversion to war, and its addiction to philanthropy. excellent characteristics both; but unfortunately the influence of women, while it is valuable in encouraging these feelings in general, does at least as much harm as good in the directions in which it steers them. on the philanthropic side more particularly, the two areas chiefly cultivated by women are religious missionary-work and charity. religious missions at home are merely ways of making religious animosities even more bitter; and foreign missions usually involve blindly running at an object without either knowing or caring about the fatal harms fatal to the religious purpose itself as well as to any other desirable purpose which may be produced by the means the missionaries employ. as for charity: that is an affair in which the immediate effect on the persons directly concerned are apt to be completely at war with the ultimate consequence to the general good; and women can't see and are unwilling to admit the ultimately harmful tendency of any form of charity or philanthropy that commends itself to their sympathetic feelings. this is result of their education which educates their feelings rather than their understanding and of the habit that their whole life has instilled in them of looking to immediate effects on individuals and not to more distant effects on classes of people. the large and growing mass of unenlightened and shortsighted benevolence, which, by taking the care of people's lives out of their own hands and relieving them from the disagreeable consequences of their own acts, undermines the very foundations of the self-respect, self-help, and self-control that are essential both for individual prosperity and for social virtue this waste of resources and of benevolent feelings in doing harm instead of good, is immensely increased by women's contributions and stimulated by their influence. this mistake isn't likely to be made by women who have the practical management of projects for helping people. it sometimes happens that women who administer public charities recognise clearly the demoralising influence of the help that is given, and could give lessons on this to many a male political economist. (they are brought to this recognition by an ability that women usually have more than men do, namely insight into present fact, and especially into the minds and feelings of those with whom they are in immediate contact.) but women who only give their money, and aren't brought face to face with the effects it produces how can they be expected to foresee the effects? if a woman is born to the present lot of women, and is content with it, how is she to appreciate the value of self-dependence? she is not self-dependent; she is not taught self-dependence; her destiny is to receive everything from others, and why should what is good enough for her be bad for the poor? the notions of good that she is familiar with are of blessings descending from a superior. she forgets that she isn't free and that the poor are; that if what they need is given to them unearned, they can't be compelled to earn it; that everybody can't be taken care of by everybody, but people need some motive to take care of themselves; and that the only charity that turns out in the long run to be charity is: helping people to help themselves if they are physically able to do so.

these considerations show how usefully the part which women take in the formation of general opinion, would be modified for the better by that more enlarged instruction, and practical conversancy with the things which their opinions influence, that would necessarily arise from their social and political emancipation. but the improvement it would work through the influence they exercise, each in her own family, would be still more remarkable.
if women were socially and politically emancipated, they would be better educated and would have more practical experience of the things that their opinions influence; and the points i have been making show that those changes would improve the part that women take in the formation of general opinion. i now go on to argue that an even more remarkable improvement would be made in the influence each woman has within her own family. the moral influence of wives on husbands

it is often said that in the classes most exposed to temptation, a man's wife and children tend to keep him honest and respectable, both by the wife's direct influence, and by the concern he feels for their future welfare. this may be so, and no doubt often is so, with those who are more weak than wicked; and this beneficial influence would be preserved and strengthened under equal laws; it does not depend on the woman's servitude, but is, on the contrary, diminished by the disrespect which the inferior class of men always at heart feel towards those who are subject to their power. but when we ascend higher in the scale, we come among a totally different set of moving forces. the wife's influence tends, as far as it goes, to prevent the husband from falling below the common standard of approbation of the country. it tends quite as strongly to hinder him from rising above it. the wife is the auxiliary of the common public opinion. a man who is married to a woman his inferior in intelligence, finds her a perpetual dead weight, or, worse than a dead weight, a drag, upon every aspiration of his to be better than public opinion requires him to be. it is hardly possible for one who is in these bonds, to attain exalted virtue. if he differs in his opinion from the mass if he sees truths which have not yet dawned upon them, or if, feeling in his heart truths which they nominally recognise, he would like to act up to those truths more conscientiously than the generality of mankind to all such thoughts and desires, marriage is the heaviest of drawbacks, unless he be so fortunate as to have a wife as much above the common level as he himself is.
it is often said that in the classes that are most exposed to temptation, a man's wife and children tend to keep him honest and respectable through his wife's direct influence and his concern for the family's future welfare. no doubt this is often the case, with men who are more weak than wicked; and this beneficial influence would be preserved and strengthened under laws that put the wife on a level with her husband. but when we go higher in the social scale, we encounter a totally different set of moving forces. the wife's influence tends to prevent the husband from falling below the country's common standard of approval; and it tends quite as strongly to hinder him from rising above it. the wife is the assistant of common public opinion. a man who is married to a woman who is his inferior in intelligence finds her a perpetual dead weight or, even worse, a drag on every active wish he has to be better than public opinion requires him to be. it is hardly possible for someone who is in these bonds to achieve a really high level of virtue. if a man differs in his opinion from the mass if he sees truths that haven't yet dawned on them, or if he would like to act more conscientiously than most people do on truths that they all nominally recognise but don't feel in their hearts as he does to all such thoughts and desires marriage is the heaviest of drawbacks, unless the lucky man has a wife who is as much above the common level as he is.

for, in the first place, there is always some sacrifice of personal interest required; either of social consequence, or of pecuniary means; perhaps the risk of even the means of subsistence. these sacrifices and risks he may be willing to encounter for himself; but he will pause before he imposes them on his family. and his family in this case means his wife and daughters; for he always hopes that his sons will feel as he feels himself, and that what he can do without, they will do without, willingly, in the same cause. but his daughters their marriage may depend upon it: and his wife, who is unable to enter into or understand the objects for which these sacrifices are made who, if she thought them worth any sacrifice, would think so on trust, and solely for his sake who can participate in none of the enthusiasm or the self-approbation he himself may feel, while the things which he is disposed to sacrifice are all in all to her; will not the best and most unselfish man hesitate the longest before bringing on her this consequence? if it be not the comforts of life, but only social consideration, that is at stake, the burthen upon his conscience and feelings is still very severe. whoever has a wife and children has given hostages to mrs. grundy. the approbation of that potentate may be a matter of indifference to him, but it is of great importance to his wife. the man himself may be above opinion, or may find sufficient compensation in the opinion of those of his own way of thinking. but to the women connected with him, he can offer no compensation. the almost invariable tendency of the wife to place her influence in the same scale with social consideration, is sometimes made a reproach to women, and represented as a peculiar trait of feebleness and childishness of character in them: surely with great injustice. society makes the whole life of a woman, in the easy classes, a continued self-sacrifice; it exacts from her an unremitting restraint of the whole of her natural inclinations, and the sole return it makes to her for what often deserves the name of a martyrdom, is consideration. her consideration is inseparably connected with that of her husband, and after paying the full price for it, she finds that she is to lose it, for no reason of which she can feel the cogency. she has sacrificed her whole life to it, and her husband will not sacrifice to it a whim, a freak, an eccentricity; something not recognised or allowed for by the world, and which the world will agree with her in thinking a folly, if it thinks no worse! the dilemma is hardest upon that very meritorious class of men, who, without possessing talents which qualify them to make a figure among those with whom they agree in opinion, hold their opinion from conviction, and feel bound in honour and conscience to serve it, by making profession of their belief, and giving their time, labour, and means, to anything undertaken in its behalf. the worst case of all is when such men happen to be of a rank and position which of itself neither gives them, nor excludes them from, what is considered the best society; when their admission to it depends mainly on what is thought of them personally and however unexceptionable their breeding and habits, their being identified with opinions and public conduct unacceptable to those who give the tone to society would operate as an effectual exclusion. many a woman flatters herself (nine times out of ten quite erroneously) that nothing prevents her and her husband from moving in the highest society of her neighbourhood society in which others well known to her, and in the same class of life, mix freely except that her husband is unfortunately a dissenter, or has the reputation of mingling in low radical politics. that it is, she thinks, which hinders george from getting a commission or a place, caroline from making an advantageous match, and prevents her and her husband from obtaining invitations, perhaps honours, which, for aught she sees, they are as well entitled to as some folks. with such an influence in every house, either exerted actively, or operating all the more powerfully for not being asserted, is it any wonder that people in general are kept down in that mediocrity of respectability which is becoming a marked characteristic of modern times?
one reason for this is that there is always some sacrifice of personal interest required, either of social status or of money, perhaps even a risk to the means of subsistence. a man may be willing to confront these sacrifices and risks for himself, but he will hesitate to impose them on his family. in this context, his family refers to his wife and daughters; for he always hopes that his sons will feel as he does, and that anything he can do without they will also do without, willingly, in the same cause. but his daughters are in a different situation: their marriage may depend on it. and if his wife can't enter into or understand the objectives for which these sacrifices are made, if she thought them worth any sacrifice, would think so solely for his sake and taking his word for it, andx couldn't join in any of the enthusiasm or self-approval that he may feel, when the things that he is disposed to sacrifice are everything to her, won't the best and most unselfish man be the most reluctant to bring this consequence down on his wife? and if what is at stake is not the comforts of life but only social status, the burden on his conscience and feelings is still very severe. anyone who has a wife and children has given hostages to mrs. grundy. the approval of that potentate may not matter to him but it is of great importance to his wife. the man may be above that sort of thing, or he may feel sufficiently compensated by the approval of those of his own way of thinking. but he has no compensation to offer the women connected with him. the almost invariable tendency of the wife to throw the weight of her influence on the side of social status is sometimes made a reproach to women, and represented as a streak of weakness and childishness in their character, but that is surely most unfair. society makes the whole life of a woman in the easy classes a continual self-sacrifice; it exacts from her an unceasing restraint of all her natural inclinations; and the only return it makes to her for what often amounts to a martyrdom is consideration. her consideration is inseparably tied to her husband's; and after paying the full price for it she finds that she is threatened with losing it for no reason that she can feel to be valid. having sacrificed her whole life to it, she's not going to let her husband sacrifice it to a whim, a caprice, an eccentricity something not recognised or allowed for by the world, and which the world will agree with her in thinking to be at best a folly. this dilemma is hardest on the very meritorious man who doesn't have talents that qualify him to be prominent among those whose opinion he shares, but who holds his opinion from conviction and feels bound in honour and conscience to serve it by professing his belief and giving his time, labour, and means to anything undertaken on its behalf. it is hardest of all when such a man happens to be of a rank and position that doesn't automatically include him in what is considered the best society but does debar him from it either. his admission to the best society depends mainly on what people think of him personally and his being identified with opinions and public conduct unacceptable to those who set the tone for society would operate as an effective barrier. many a woman soothes herself with the thought (nine times out of ten a wrong thought) that nothing prevents her and her husband from moving in the highest society of her neighbourhood society in which others well known to her, and in the same class of life, mix freely except that her husband is unfortunately a dissenter, or has the reputation of mingling in low radical politics. with such an influence in every house, either exerted actively or operating all the more powerfully for not being asserted, is it any wonder that people in general are kept down to the middling level of respectability that is becoming a marked feature of modern times?

there is another very injurious aspect in which the effect, not of women's disabilities directly, but of the broad line of difference which those disabilities create between the education and character of a woman and that of a man, requires to be considered. nothing can be more unfavourable to that union of thoughts and inclinations which is the ideal of married life. intimate society between people radically dissimilar to one another, is an idle dream. unlikeness may attract, but it is likeness which retains; and in proportion to the likeness is the suitability of the individuals to give each other a happy life. while women are so unlike men, it is not wonderful that selfish men should feel the need of arbitrary power in their own hands, to arrest in limine the life-long conflict of inclinations, by deciding every question on the side of their own preference. when people are extremely unlike, there can be no real identity of interest. very often there is conscientious difference of opinion between married people, on the highest points of duty. is there any reality in the marriage union where this takes place? yet it is not uncommon anywhere, when the woman has any earnestness of character; and it is a very general case indeed in catholic countries, when she is supported in her dissent by the only other authority to which she is taught to bow, the priest. with the usual barefacedness of power not accustomed to find itself disputed, the influence of priests over women is attacked by protestant and liberal writers, less for being bad in itself, than because it is a rival authority to the husband, and raises up a revolt against his infallibility. in england, similar differences occasionally exist when an evangelical wife has allied herself with a husband of a different quality; but in general this source at least of dissension is got rid of, by reducing the minds of women to such a nullity, that they have no opinions but those of mrs. grundy, or those which the husband tells them to have. when there is no difference of opinion, differences merely of taste may be sufficient to detract greatly from the happiness of married life. and though it may stimulate the amatory propensities of men, it does not conduce to married happiness, to exaggerate by differences of education whatever may be the native differences of the sexes. if the married pair are well-bred and well-behaved people, they tolerate each other's tastes; but is mutual toleration what people look forward to, when they enter into marriage? these differences of inclination will naturally make their wishes different, if not restrained by affection or duty, as to almost all domestic questions which arise. what a difference there must be in the society which the two persons will wish to frequent, or be frequented by! each will desire associates who share their own tastes: the persons agreeable to one, will be indifferent or positively disagreeable to the other; yet there can be none who are not common to both, for married people do not now live in different parts of the house and have totally different visiting lists, as in the reign of louis xv. they cannot help having different wishes as to the bringing up of the children: each will wish to see reproduced in them their own tastes and sentiments: and there is either a compromise, and only a half-satisfaction to either, or the wife has to yield often with bitter suffering; and, with or without intention, her occult influence continues to counterwork the husband's purposes.
let us look now not at women's disabilities directly but at the broad line of difference those disabilities create between a woman's education and character and a man's. the difference has very harmful consequences; indeed, nothing can be more unfavourable to the union of thoughts and inclinations that is the ideal of married life. an intimate relation between people who are radically unlike one another? that is an idle dream! unlikeness may attract, but likeness is what retains; and the more alike a couple are the better fitted they are to give each other a happy life. while women are so unlike men, it's not surprising that selfish men should feel the need to have arbitrary power in their own hands, to stop a life-long conflict of inclinations before it gets started, by deciding every issue on the side of their own preference. when people are extremely unalike, they can't have any real identity of interest. very often a married couple have a conscientious difference of opinion concerning the highest points of duty. is there any reality in the marriage union where this is the case? yet it is common enough wherever a married woman has any earnestness of character; and it is very common in catholic countries, when the wife is supported in her dissent by the only other authority to which she is taught to bow, the priest. with the usual barefacedness of power that isn't used to being challenged, the influence of priests over women is attacked by protestant and liberal writers, less for being bad in itself than because it is a rival to the husband's authority, and raises up a revolt against his infallibility. when there is no difference of moral or religious opinion, mere differences of taste can detract greatly from the happiness of married life. if the married pair are well-bred and well-behaved, they tolerate each other's tastes; but is mutual toleration what people look forward to when they enter into marriage? these differences of inclination will naturally make their wishes different, if not restrained by affection or duty, with regard to almost all domestic questions that arise. what a difference there must be in the society the spouses will wish to frequent! each will want associates who share his or her own tastes; the persons agreeable to one will be indifferent or positively disagreeable to the other; yet all their associates must be common to both, because married people these days don't live in different parts of the house and have totally different visiting lists. they can't help having different wishes about the upbringing of the children: each will want to see reproduced in the children his or her own tastes and sentiments; and either there is a compromise, giving only half satisfaction to each, or the wife has to yield often with bitter suffering.

it would of course be extreme folly to suppose that these differences of feeling and inclination only exist because women are brought up differently from men, and that there would not be differences of taste under any imaginable circumstances. but there is nothing beyond the mark in saying that the distinction in bringing-up immensely aggravates those differences, and renders them wholly inevitable. while women are brought up as they are, a man and a woman will but rarely find in one another real agreement of tastes and wishes as to daily life. they will generally have to give it up as hopeless, and renounce the attempt to have, in the intimate associate of their daily life, that idem velle, idem nolle, which is the recognised bond of any society that is really such: or if the man succeeds in obtaining it, he does so by choosing a woman who is so complete a nullity that she has no velle or nolle at all, and is as ready to comply with one thing as another if anybody tells her to do so. even this calculation is apt to fail; dulness and want of spirit are not always a guarantee of the submission which is so confidently expected from them. but if they were, is this the ideal of marriage? what, in this case, does the man obtain by it, except an upper servant, a nurse, or a mistress? on the contrary, when each of two persons, instead of being a nothing, is a something; when they are attached to one another, and are not too much unlike to begin with; the constant partaking in the same things, assisted by their sympathy, draws out the latent capacities of each for being interested in the things which were at first interesting only to the other; and works a gradual assimilation of the tastes and characters to one another, partly by the insensible modification of each, but more by a real enriching of the two natures, each acquiring the tastes and capacities of the other in addition to its own. this often happens between two friends of the same sex, who are much associated in their daily life: and it would be a common, if not the commonest, case in marriage, did not the totally different bringing-up of the two sexes make it next to an impossibility to form a really well-assorted union. were this remedied, whatever differences there might still be in individual tastes, there would at least be, as a general rule, complete unity and unanimity as to the great objects of life. when the two persons both care for great objects, and are a help and encouragement to each other in whatever regards these, the minor matters on which their tastes may differ are not all-important to them; and there is a foundation for solid friendship, of an enduring character, more likely than anything else to make it, through the whole of life, a greater pleasure to each to give pleasure to the other, than to receive it.
it would of course be foolish to suppose that these differences of feeling and inclination exist only because women are brought up differently from men. obviously there would be some differences of taste under any imaginable circumstances. but it isn't foolish to say that the difference in upbringing immensely increases those differences and makes them wholly inevitable. while women are brought up as they are, a man and a woman will rarely find themselves in real agreement of tastes and wishes regarding daily life. they will generally have to give up as hopeless the attempt to have in their private daily life the idem velle, idem nolle which is the recognised bond of any society that really is a society. or the man succeeds in obtaining it by choosing a woman who is so complete a nullity that she has no velle or nolle at all, and is as ready to go along with one thing as with another if anybody tells her to do so. even this calculation of the man's is apt to fail; dullness and lack of spirit are not always a guarantee of the submission that is so confidently expected from them. but even if they were, is this the ideal of marriage? what in this case does the man get by marriage except an upper servant, a nurse, or a mistress? on the other hand, when each of two persons instead of being a nothing is a something; when they are attached to one another and are not too unalike to begin with; the constant shared experience of the same things, assisted by their sympathy, draws out the latent capacities of each for being interested in the things that were at first interesting only to the other. this produces a gradual assimilation of their tastes and characters to one another, partly by the gradual modification of each but more by a real enriching of the two natures, each acquiring the tastes and capacities of the other in addition to its own. this often happens between two friends of the same sex who are much in one another's company in their daily life: and it would be common in marriage if it weren't that the totally different bringing up of the two sexes make it nearly impossible to form a really well-suited union. if this were remedied, whatever differences there might still be in individual tastes, there would usually be complete unity and unanimity regarding the great objectives of life. when spouses both care for great objectives, and help and encourage each other in anything concerning these, the minor matters on which their tastes may differ are not all-important to them; and there's a basis for solid friendship of an enduring character, more likely than anything else to make it a lifelong greater pleasure for each to give pleasure to the other than to receive it.

i have considered, thus far, the effects on the pleasures and benefits of the marriage union which depend on the mere unlikeness between the wife and the husband: but the evil tendency is prodigiously aggravated when the unlikeness is inferiority. mere unlikeness, when it only means difference of good qualities, may be more a benefit in the way of mutual improvement, than a drawback from comfort. when each emulates, and desires and endeavours to acquire, the other's peculiar qualities, the difference does not produce diversity of interest, but increased identity of it, and makes each still more valuable to the other. but when one is much the inferior of the two in mental ability and cultivation, and is not actively attempting by the other's aid to rise to the other's level, the whole influence of the connexion upon the development of the superior of the two is deteriorating: and still more so in a tolerably happy marriage than in an unhappy one. it is not with impunity that the superior in intellect shuts himself up with an inferior, and elects that inferior for his chosen, and sole completely intimate, associate. any society which is not improving, is deteriorating: and the more so, the closer and more familiar it is. even a really superior man almost always begins to deteriorate when he is habitually (as the phrase is) king of his company: and in his most habitual company the husband who has a wife inferior to him is always so. while his self-satisfaction is incessantly ministered to on the one hand, on the other he insensibly imbibes the modes of feeling, and of looking at things, which belong to a more vulgar or a more limited mind than his own. this evil differs from many of those which have hitherto been dwelt on, by being an increasing one. the association of men with women in daily life is much closer and more complete than it ever was before. men's life is more domestic. formerly, their pleasures and chosen occupations were among men, and in men's company: their wives had but a fragment of their lives. at the present time, the progress of civilization, and the turn of opinion against the rough amusements and convivial excesses which formerly occupied most men in their hours of relaxation together with (it must be said) the improved tone of modern feeling as to the reciprocity of duty which binds the husband towards the wife have thrown the man very much more upon home and its inmates, for his personal and social pleasures: while the kind and degree of improvement which has been made in women's education, has made them in some degree capable of being his companions in ideas and mental tastes, while leaving them, in most cases, still hopelessly inferior to him. his desire of mental communion is thus in general satisfied by a communion from which he learns nothing. an unimproving and unstimulating companionship is substituted for (what he might otherwise have been obliged to seek) the society of his equals in powers and his fellows in the higher pursuits. we see, accordingly, that young men of the greatest promise generally cease to improve as soon as they marry, and, not improving, inevitably degenerate. if the wife does not push the husband forward, she always holds him back. he ceases to care for what she does not care for; he no longer desires, and ends by disliking and shunning, society congenial to his former aspirations, and which would now shame his falling-off from them; his higher faculties both of mind and heart cease to be called into activity. and this change coinciding with the new and selfish interests which are created by the family, after a few years he differs in no material respect from those who have never had wishes for anything but the common vanities and the common pecuniary objects.
so much for the effects of mere unlikeness between the wife and the husband on the pleasures and benefits of marriage; but the power for bad is vastly increased when the unlikeness is inferiority. when unlikeness is merely difference of good qualities, it may be more a benefit in the way of mutual improvement than a drawback from comfort. when each spouse wants and tries to acquire the other's special qualities, the difference between them doesn't drive their interests apart but rather pulls them together, making each spouse still more valuable to the other. but when one of them has much less mental ability and cultivation than the other, and isn't actively trying with the other's aid to rise to the other's level, this marriage will have a wholly bad influence on the mental development of abler of the two; and even more in a reasonably happy marriage than in an unhappy one. someone who shuts himself up with an inferior, choosing that inferior as his one completely intimate associate, is doing himself harm. any society that isn't improving is deteriorating: and the closer and more familiar it is, the more it deteriorates. even a really superior man, in nearly all cases, begins to deteriorate when he is habitually (as the phrase is) king of his company, and someone whose habitual company is a wife who is inferior to him is always king of it. while his self-satisfaction is constantly ministered to on the one hand, on the other he unconsciously acquires the ways of feeling and of looking at things that belong to a more ordinary or a more limited mind than his own. the improvement that has been made in women's education has made them in some degree capable of being men's companions in ideas and mental taste, but it still leaves most women hopelessly inferior to their spouses. what generally happens, then, is that the husband's desire for mental communion is satisfied by a communion from which he learns nothing. an unimproving and unstimulating companionship is substituted for (what he might otherwise have been forced to seek) the society of men whose abilities equal his and who share his interest in the higher pursuits. thus, we see that very promising young men usually stop improving as soon as they marry, and when they don't improve they inevitably degenerate. if the wife doesn't push the husband forward, she always holds him back. he stops caring for what she doesn't care for; he no longer wants and eventually he dislikes and avoids the company of people who share his former aspirations , and his higher faculties of mind and of heart are no longer called into activity. this change coincides with the new and selfish interests that are created by the family, so that after a few years he doesn't differ significantly from those who never did have any higher aspirations.

what marriage may be in the case of two persons of cultivated faculties, identical in opinions and purposes, between whom there exists that best kind of equality, similarity of powers and capacities with reciprocal superiority in them so that each can enjoy the luxury of looking up to the other, and can have alternately the pleasure of leading and of being led in the path of development i will not attempt to describe. to those who can conceive it, there is no need; to those who cannot, it would appear the dream of an enthusiast. but i maintain, with the profoundest conviction, that this, and this only, is the ideal of marriage; and that all opinions, customs, and institutions which favour any other notion of it, or turn the conceptions and aspirations connected with it into any other direction, by whatever pretences they may be coloured, are relics of primitive barbarism. the moral regeneration of mankind will only really commence, when the most fundamental of the social relations is placed under the rule of equal justice, and when human beings learn to cultivate their strongest sympathy with an equal in rights and in cultivation.
when two persons of high ability, identical in opinions and purposes, have the best kind of equality similarity of powers and capacities, with each being superior to the other in some things, so that each can enjoy the luxury of looking up to the other, and they can take turns in the pleasure of leading and the pleasure of being led in the path of development i shan't try to describe what that marriage will be like. those who can conceive it don't need my description; those who can't conceive it would brush off my description as the raving of a fanatic. but i am deeply convinced that that this, and only this, is the ideal of marriage; and that all opinions, customs, and institutions that favour any other notion of marriage, or turn the ideas and aims connected with marriage into any other direction are relics of primitive barbarism. the moral renewal of mankind won't really start until the most basic of all social relations is placed under the rule of equal justice, and human beings learn to develop their strongest sympathy with someone who is their equal in rights and in cultivation.

thus far, the benefits which it has appeared that the world would gain by ceasing to make sex a disqualification for privileges and a badge of subjection, are social rather than individual; consisting in an increase of the general fund of thinking and acting power, and an improvement in the general conditions of the association of men with women. but it would be a grievous understatement of the case to omit the most direct benefit of all, the unspeakable gain in private happiness to the liberated half of the species; the difference to them between a life of subjection to the will of others, and a life of rational freedom. after the primary necessities of food and raiment, freedom is the first and strongest want of human nature. while mankind are lawless, their desire is for lawless freedom. when they have learnt to understand the meaning of duty and the value of reason, they incline more and more to be guided and restrained by these in the exercise of their freedom; but they do not therefore desire freedom less; they do not become disposed to accept the will of other people as the representative and interpreter of those guiding principles. on the contrary, the communities in which the reason has been most cultivated, and in which the idea of social duty has been most powerful, are those which have most strongly asserted the freedom of action of the individual the liberty of each to govern his conduct by his own feelings of duty, and by such laws and social restraints as his own conscience can subscribe to.
benefits to the individual woman up to here i have discussed the social rather than the individual benefits that would come from abolishing the subjection of women; but it would be a grievous understatement of the case to omit the most direct benefit of all, the indescribably great gain in the private happiness of members of the liberated half of the species the difference to them between a life of subjection to the will of others and a life of rational freedom. after the basic needs for food and clothing, freedom is the first and strongest want of human nature. while mankind are lawless, they want lawless freedom. when they have learned to understand the meaning of duty and the value of reason, they are increasingly inclined to be guided and restrained by these in the exercise of their freedom; but that doesn't mean that they desire freedom less; they don't become disposed to accept the will of other people as the representative and interpreter of those guiding principles of duty and reason. on the contrary, the communities in which reason has been most cultivated and the idea of social duty has been most powerful are the very ones that have most strongly asserted the freedom of action of the individual the liberty of each person to govern his conduct by his own feelings of duty, and by such laws and social restraints as his own conscience can subscribe to.

he who would rightly appreciate the worth of personal independence as an element of happiness, should consider the value he himself puts upon it as an ingredient of his own. there is no subject on which there is a greater habitual difference of judgment between a man judging for himself, and the same man judging for other people. when he hears others complaining that they are not allowed freedom of action that their own will has not sufficient influence in the regulation of their affairs his inclination is, to ask, what are their grievances? what positive damage they sustain? and in what respect they consider their affairs to be mismanaged? and if they fail to make out, in answer to these questions, what appears to him a sufficient case, he turns a deaf ear, and regards their complaint as the fanciful querulousness of people whom nothing reasonable will satisfy. but he has a quite different standard of judgment when he is deciding for himself. then, the most unexceptionable administration of his interests by a tutor set over him, does not satisfy his feelings: his personal exclusion from the deciding authority appears itself the greatest grievance of all, rendering it superfluous even to enter into the question of mismanagement. it is the same with nations. what citizen of a free country would listen to any offers of good and skilful administration, in return for the abdication of freedom? even if he could believe that good and skilful administration can exist among a people ruled by a will not their own, would not the consciousness of working out their own destiny under their own moral responsibility be a compensation to his feelings for great rudeness and imperfection in the details of public affairs? let him rest assured that whatever he feels on this point, women feel in a fully equal degree. whatever has been said or written, from the time of herodotus to the present, of the ennobling influence of free government the nerve and spring which it gives to all the faculties, the larger and higher objects which it presents to the intellect and feelings, the more unselfish public spirit, and calmer and broader views of duty, that it engenders, and the generally loftier platform on which it elevates the individual as a moral, spiritual, and social being is every particle as true of women as of men. are these things no important part of individual happiness? let any man call to mind what he himself felt on emerging from boyhood from the tutelage and control of even loved and affectionate elders and entering upon the responsibilities of manhood. was it not like the physical effect of taking off a heavy weight, or releasing him from obstructive, even if not otherwise painful, bonds? did he not feel twice as much alive, twice as much a human being, as before? and does he imagine that women have none of these feelings? but it is a striking fact, that the satisfactions and mortifications of personal pride, though all in all to most men when the case is their own, have less allowance made for them in the case of other people, and are less listened to as a ground or a justification of conduct, than any other natural human feelings; perhaps because men compliment them in their own case with the names of so many other qualities, that they are seldom conscious how mighty an influence these feelings exercise in their own lives. no less large and powerful is their part, we may assure ourselves, in the lives and feelings of women. women are schooled into suppressing them in their most natural and most healthy direction, but the internal principle remains, in a different outward form. an active and energetic mind, if denied liberty, will seek for power: refused the command of itself, it will assert its personality by attempting to control others. to allow to any human beings no existence of their own but what depends on others, is giving far too high a premium on bending others to their purposes. where liberty cannot be hoped for, and power can, power becomes the grand object of human desire; those to whom others will not leave the undisturbed management of their own affairs, will compensate themselves, if they can, by meddling for their own purposes with the affairs of others. hence also women's passion for personal beauty, and dress and display; and all the evils that flow from it, in the way of mischievous luxury and social immorality. the love of power and the love of liberty are in eternal antagonism. where there is least liberty, the passion for power is the most ardent and unscrupulous. the desire of power over others can only cease to be a depraving agency among mankind, when each of them individually is able to do without it: which can only be where respect for liberty in the personal concerns of each is an established principle.
anyone who wants a sound sense of the worth of personal independence as an ingredient in happiness should consider how he values it as an ingredient in his own happiness. what a man judges for himself on this subject as much as on any subject differs from what he judges for other people. when he hears others complaining that they aren't allowed freedom of action that their own will has too little influence in the regulation of their affairs he is inclined to ask: what are their grievances? what positive damage are they suffering? how do they think their affairs are mismanaged? and if they can't answer these questions in a way that seems to him to be adequate, he turns a deaf ear, and regards their complaint as the fanciful querulousness of people whom nothing reasonable will satisfy. but he has a quite different standard of judgment when he is deciding for himself. in that case, faultless administration of his interests by a tutor who has been set over him doesn't satisfy his feelings: the sheer fact of his personal exclusion from the deciding authority is the greatest grievance of all, removing any need to go into the question of mismanagement. it is the same with nations. what citizen of a free country would listen to any offers of good and skilful government in return for the abdication of freedom? even if he believed that good and skilful administration can exist among a people ruled by a will not their own better and more skillful, indeed, than his country now has his feelings about the rough and imperfect handling of public affairs is compensated for by his sense that he and his fellow-citizens are working out their own destiny under their own moral responsibility. well, whatever he feels about this, he can be sure that women feel it just as much. whatever has been said or written, from the time of herodotus to the present, about the enobling influence of free government the nerve and spring that it gives to all the faculties, the larger and higher objectives that it presents to the intellect and feelings, the more unselfish public spirit, and calmer and broader views of duty, that it creates, and the higher platform on which it elevates the individual as a moral, spiritual, and social being is every bit as true of women as of men. aren't these things an important part of individual happiness? let any man recall what he felt on emerging from boyhood from the tutelage and control of even loved and affectionate elders and entering on the responsibilities of manhood. wasn't it like the physical effect of taking off a heavy weight ? didn't he feel twice as alive, twice as much a human being, as before? and does he imagine that women have none of these feelings? an active and energetic mind, if denied liberty, will seek power; refused the command of itself, it will assert its personality by trying to control others. to allow to any human beings no existence of their own except what depends on others is motivating them to bend others to their purposes. where liberty can't be hoped for, and power can, power becomes the grand object of human desire. hence women's passion for personal beauty, and dress and display, and all the evils that flow from that. the love of power and the love of liberty are in eternal antagonism. where there is least liberty, the passion for power is the most ardent and unscrupulous. the desire for power over others can't cease to be a depraving agency among mankind until each individual human being can do without it, and that can't happen until respect for each person's liberty is an established principle.

but it is not only through the sentiment of personal dignity, that the free direction and disposal of their own faculties is a source of individual happiness, and to be fettered and restricted in it, a source of unhappiness, to human beings, and not least to women. there is nothing, after disease, indigence, and guilt, so fatal to the pleasurable enjoyment of life as the want of a worthy outlet for the active faculties. women who have the cares of a family, and while they have the cares of a family, have this outlet, and it generally suffices for them: but what of the greatly increasing number of women, who have had no opportunity of exercising the vocation which they are mocked by telling them is their proper one? what of the women whose children have been lost to them by death or distance, or have grown up, married, and formed homes of their own? there are abundant examples of men who, after a life engrossed by business, retire with a competency to the enjoyment, as they hope, of rest, but to whom, as they are unable to acquire new interests and excitements that can replace the old, the change to a life of inactivity brings ennui, melancholy, and premature death. yet no one thinks of the parallel case of so many worthy and devoted women, who, having paid what they are told is their debt to society having brought up a family blamelessly to manhood and womanhood having kept a house as long as they had a house needing to be kept are deserted by the sole occupation for which they have fitted themselves; and remain with undiminished activity but with no employment for it, unless perhaps a daughter or daughter-in-law is willing to abdicate in their favour the discharge of the same functions in her younger household. surely a hard lot for the old age of those who have worthily discharged, as long as it was given to them to discharge, what the world accounts their only social duty. of such women, and of those others to whom this duty has not been committed at all many of whom pine through life with the consciousness of thwarted vocations, and activities which are not suffered to expand the only resources, speaking generally, are religion and charity. but their religion, though it may be one of feeling, and of ceremonial observance, cannot be a religion of action, unless in the form of charity. for charity many of them are by nature admirably fitted; but to practise it usefully, or even without doing mischief, requires the education, the manifold preparation, the knowledge and the thinking powers, of a skilful administrator. there are few of the administrative functions of government for which a person would not be fit, who is fit to bestow charity usefully. in this as in other cases (pre-eminently in that of the education of children), the duties permitted to women cannot be performed properly, without their being trained for duties which, to the great loss of society, are not permitted to them. and here let me notice the singular way in which the question of women's disabilities is frequently presented to view, by those who find it easier to draw a ludicrous picture of what they do not like, than to answer the arguments for it. when it is suggested that women's executive capacities and prudent counsels might sometimes be found valuable in affairs of state, these lovers of fun hold up to the ridicule of the world, as sitting in parliament or in the cabinet, girls in their teens, or young wives of two or three and twenty, transported bodily, exactly as they are, from the drawing-room to the house of commons. they forget that males are not usually selected at this early age for a seat in parliament, or for responsible political functions. common sense would tell them that if such trusts were confided to women, it would be to such as having no special vocation for married life, or preferring another employment of their faculties (as many women even now prefer to marriage some of the few honourable occupations within their reach), have spent the best years of their youth in attempting to qualify themselves for the pursuits in which they desire to engage; or still more frequently perhaps, widows or wives of forty or fifty, by whom the knowledge of life and faculty of government which they have acquired in their families, could by the aid of appropriate studies be made available on a less contracted scale. there is no country of europe in which the ablest men have not frequently experienced, and keenly appreciated, the value of the advice and help of clever and experienced women of the world, in the attainment both of private and of public objects; and there are important matters of public administration to which few men are equally competent with such women; among others, the detailed control of expenditure. but what we are now discussing is not the need which society has of the services of women in public business, but the dull and hopeless life to which it so often condemns them, by forbidding them to exercise the practical abilities which many of them are conscious of, in any wider field than one which to some of them never was, and to others is no longer, open. if there is anything vitally important to the happiness of human beings, it is that they should relish their habitual pursuit. this requisite of an enjoyable life is very imperfectly granted, or altogether denied, to a large part of mankind; and by its absence many a life is a failure, which is provided, in appearance, with every requisite of success. but if circumstances which society is not yet skilful enough to overcome, render such failures often for the present inevitable, society need not itself inflict them. the injudiciousness of parents, a youth's own inexperience, or the absence of external opportunities for the congenial vocation, and their presence for an uncongenial, condemn numbers of men to pass their lives in doing one thing reluctantly and ill, when there are other things which they could have done well and happily. but on women this sentence is imposed by actual law, and by customs equivalent to law. what, in unenlightened societies, colour, race, religion, or in the case of a conquered country, nationality, are to some men, sex is to all women; a peremptory exclusion from almost all honourable occupations, but either such as cannot be fulfilled by others, or such as those others do not think worthy of their acceptance. sufferings arising from causes of this nature usually meet with so little sympathy, that few persons are aware of the great amount of unhappiness even now produced by the feeling of a wasted life. the case will be even more frequent, as increased cultivation creates a greater and greater disproportion between the ideas and faculties of women, and the scope which society allows to their activity.
but it is not only through the sense of personal dignity that the free direction and disposal of their own faculties is a source of individual happiness, and to be fettered and restricted in it is a source of unhappiness, to human beings, and not least to women. apart from disease, extreme poverty. and guilt, nothing is as fatal to the pleasurable enjoyment of life as the lack of something worthwhile to do. while a woman has the care of a family, that provides an outlet for her active faculties, and usually that is enough. but what about the ever-increasing number of women who have had no opportunity of exercising the vocation that they are mocked by telling them is their proper one? what about the women whose children have been lost to them by death or distance, or have grown up, married, and formed homes of their own? there are many examples of men who after a life taken up by business retire with a pension and find that their change to a life of inactivity brings boredom, depression, and premature death; their trouble being their inability to acquire new interests and excitements to replace the old. yet no-one thinks of the parallel case of so many worthy and devoted women, who, having paid what they are told is their debt to society, having brought up a family blamelessly to manhood and womanhood, having kept house as long as they had a house needing to be kept, are deserted by the only occupation they have fitted themselves for, and are left with undiminished activeness but with no use to make of it, unless perhaps a daughter or daughterin-law is willing to let them do the same work in her own younger household. for women like these, and for others who have never had this task the only resources, speaking generally, are religion and charity. but their religion, though it may be one of feeling and of ceremonies, can't be a religion of action except in the form of charity. many of these women are by nature admirably fitted for charitable work; but to practise charity usefully indeed, to practise charity without doing harm one needs the education, the skills, the knowledge and the thinking powers of a skilful administrator. anyone who is fit to do useful charitable work could performs almost any of the administrative functions of government. in this as in other cases (notably the education of children), the duties permitted to women can't be performed properly unless they are trained for duties that (to the great loss of society) they aren't allowed to perform. let me point out here the strange way in which the question of women's disabilities is often presented by people who, confronted by the prospect of something they don't like, find it easier to draw a ludicrous picture of it than to answer the arguments for it. when it is suggested that women's executive capacities and prudent advice might sometimes be valuable in affairs of state, these lovers of fun hold up to the ridicule of the world a picture of girls in their teens or young wives in their early twenties being transported bodily, exactly as they are, from the drawing-room to the house of commons or the cabinet room. they forget that males aren't usually selected at this early age for a seat in parliament or for responsible political functions. common sense, if they had any, would tell them that if such trusts were confided to women it would be to women with no special vocation for married life, or women who choose some other employment of their abilities, or more often perhaps widows or wives of forty or fifty who could, with the aid of appropriate studies, make available to the wider world the knowledge of life and skill in government that they have acquired in their families. in every european country the ablest men have often experienced and keenly appreciated the advice and help of clever and experienced women of the world, in achieving both private and of public objectives; and there are important aspects of public administration in which few men are as competent as such women e.g. the detailed control of expenditure. but my present topic is not society's need for women's services in public business, but the dull and hopeless life it condemns them to by forbidding them to exercise the practical abilities that many of them are conscious of having, in any wider field than one that is now closed to some of them and to others was never open. if there is anything vitally important to the happiness of human beings it is that they should like what they habitually do. this requirement for an enjoyable life is very imperfectly granted, or entirely denied, to a large part of mankind; and because of the lack of it many a life that seems to have everything needed for success is actually a failure. but if such failures are often inevitable now, because of circumstances that society isn't yet skilful enough to overcome, society needn't itself inflict them! many men spend their lives doing one thing reluctantly and badly when they could have done other things happily and well; this may come about through bad choices by parents, or a youth's own inexperience, or the absence of opportunities for the congenial vocation and their presence for an uncongenial one. but on women this sentence is imposed by actual law, and by customs equivalent to law. what in unenlightened societies colour, race, religion, or nationality are to some men, sex is to all women an abrupt exclusion from almost all honourable occupations except ones that others can't perform or aren't willing to perform. sufferings arising from this cause usually meet with so little sympathy that few people realize how much unhappiness is produced, even now, by the feeling of a wasted life. this will happen even more frequently when increased cultivation creates a greater and greater disproportion between women's ideas and abilities and the scope that society allows for their activity.

when we consider the positive evil caused to the disqualified half of the human race by their disqualification first in the loss of the most inspiriting and elevating kind of personal enjoyment, and next in the weariness, disappointment, and profound dissatisfaction with life, which are so often the substitute for it; one feels that among all the lessons which men require for carrying on the struggle against the inevitable imperfections of their lot on earth, there is no lesson which they more need, than not to add to the evils which nature inflicts, by their jealous and prejudiced restrictions on one another. their vain fears only substitute other and worse evils for those which they are idly apprehensive of: while every restraint on the freedom of conduct of any of their human fellow creatures, (otherwise than by making them responsible for any evil actually caused by it), dries up pro tanto the principal fountain of human happiness, and leaves the species less rich, to an inappreciable degree, in all that makes life valuable to the individual human being.
when we consider the positive evil caused to the disqualified half of the human race first in the loss of the most inspiriting and elevating kind of personal enjoyment, and then in the weariness, disappointment, and profound dissatisfaction with life that are so often the substitute for it, one feels that among all the lessons that men need to learn for carrying on the struggle against the inevitable imperfections of their lot on earth, no lesson is more needed than not to add to the evils that nature inflicts by their jealous and prejudiced restrictions on one another. their stupid fears only substitute other and worse evils for the ones that they are lazily anxious about; while every restraint on the freedom of conduct of any of their human fellow-creatures (otherwise than by making them responsible for any evil actually caused by their conduct) does its bit towards drying up the principal fountain of human happiness, and leaves our species less rich in all that makes life valuable to the individual human being.

chapter i childhood and early education
part 1: childhood and early education

it seems proper that i should prefix to the following biographical sketch some mention of the reasons which have made me think it desirable that i should leave behind me such a memorial of so uneventful a life as mine. i do not for a moment imagine that any part of what i have to relate can be interesting to the public as a narrative or as being connected with myself. but i have thought that in an age in which education and its improvement are the subject of more, if not of profounder, study than at any former period of english history, it may be useful that there should be some record of an education which was unusual and remarkable, and which, whatever else it may have done, has proved how much more than is commonly supposed may be taught, and well taught, in those early years which, in the common modes of what is called instruction, are little better than wasted. it has also seemed to me that in an age of transition in opinions, there may be somewhat both of interest and of benefit in noting the successive phases of any mind which was always pressing forward, equally ready to learn and to unlearn either from its own thoughts or from those of others. but a motive which weighs more with me than either of these, is a desire to make acknowledgment of the debts which my intellectual and moral development owes to other persons; some of them of recognised eminence, others less known than they deserve to be, and the one to whom most of all is due, one whom the world had no opportunity of knowing. the reader whom these things do not interest, has only himself to blame if he reads farther, and i do not desire any other indulgence from him than that of bearing in mind that for him these pages were not written.
it seems proper that before embarking on the following biographical sketch i should explain why i think it desirable that i should leave behind me such a memorial of a life as uneventful as mine. i do not for a moment imagine that any part of it can be interesting to the public as a narrative, or as being connected with myself. but i have thought that in an age in which education, and its improvement, are subjected to more (if not deeper) study than at any former period of english history, it may be useful to have some record of an education which was unusual and remarkable, and which whatever else it may have done has proved how much more than is commonly supposed may be taught, and well taught, in those early years, years that are little better than wasted in the common modes of what is called instruction. it has also seemed to me that in an age of transition in opinions there may be some interest and some benefit in noting the successive phases of any mind that was always pressing forward, equally ready to learn and to unlearn either from its own thoughts or from those of others. but a motive that weighs more with me than either of these is a desire to acknowledge the debts that my intellectual and moral development owes to other persons; some of recognised eminence, others less known than they deserve to be, and the one to whom most of all is due, one whom the world had no opportunity of knowing. the reader whom these things do not interest has only himself to blame if he reads on; i ask him to do me the kindness of bearing in mind that these pages were not written for him.

i was born in london, on the 20th of may, 1806, and was the eldest son of james mill, the author of the history of british india. my father, the son of a petty tradesman and (i believe) small farmer, at northwater bridge, in the county of angus, was, when a boy, recommended by his abilities to the notice of sir john stuart, of fettercairn, one of the barons of the exchequer in scotland, and was, in consequence, sent to the university of edinburgh, at the expense of a fund established by lady jane stuart (the wife of sir john stuart) and some other ladies for educating young men for the scottish church. he there went through the usual course of study, and was licensed as a preacher, but never followed the profession; having satisfied himself that he could not believe the doctrines of that or any other church. for a few years he was a private tutor in various families in scotland, among others that of the marquis of tweeddale, but ended by taking up his residence in london, and devoting himself to authorship. nor had he any other means of support until 1819, when he obtained an appointment in the india house.
my father i was born in london on 20.v.1806, and was the oldest son of james mill, the author of the history of british india. my father, the son of a petty tradesman and (i believe) small farmer at northwater bridge in the county of angus was, when a boy, recommended by his abilities to the notice of sir john stuart of fettercairn, one of the barons of the exchequer in scotland, and was in consequence sent to the university of edinburgh at the expense of a fund established by lady jane stuart (the wife of sir john stuart) and some other ladies for educating young men for the scottish church. he there went through the usual course of study and was licensed as a preacher; but he never followed the profession, having satisfied himself that he could not believe the doctrines of that or any other church. for a few years he was a private tutor in various families in scotland, including that of the marquis of tweeddale; but ended by taking up his residence in london, and devoting himself to authorship. that was his only means of support until 1819 when he obtained an appointment in the india house.

in this period of my father's life there are two things which it is impossible not to be struck with: one of them unfortunately a very common circumstance, the other a most uncommon one. the first is, that in his position, with no resource but the precarious one of writing in periodicals, he married and had a large family; conduct than which nothing could be more opposed, both as a matter of good sense and of duty, to the opinions which, at least at a later period of life, he strenuously upheld. the other circumstance, is the extraordinary energy which was required to lead the life he led, with the disadvantages under which he laboured from the first, and with those which he brought upon himself by his marriage. it would have been no small thing, had he done no more than to support himself and his family during so many years by writing, without ever being in debt, or in any pecuniary difficulty; holding, as he did, opinions, both in politics and in religion, which were more odious to all persons of influence, and to the common run of prosperous englishmen, in that generation than either before or since; and being not only a man whom nothing would have induced to write against his convictions, but one who invariably threw into everything he wrote, as much of his convictions as he thought the circumstances would in any way permit: being, it must also be said, one who never did anything negligently; never undertook any task, literary or other, on which he did not conscientiously bestow all the labour necessary for performing it adequately. but he, with these burdens on him, planned, commenced, and completed, the history of india; and this in the course of about ten years, a shorter time than has been occupied (even by writers who had no other employment) in the production of almost any other historical work of equal bulk, and of anything approaching to the same amount of reading and research. and to this is to be added, that during the whole period, a considerable part of almost every day was employed in the instruction of his children: in the case of one of whom, myself, he exerted an amount of labour, care, and perseverance rarely, if ever, employed for a similar purpose, in endeavouring to give, according to his own conception, the highest order of intellectual education.
in this period of my father's life there are two things that one must be struck with: one unfortunately a very common circumstance, the other a most uncommon one. the first is that in his position, with no resource but the precarious one of writing in periodicals, he married and had a large family conduct that was utterly opposed, as a matter of good sense and of duty, to the opinions that he strenuously upheld at least at a later period of life. the other circumstance is the extraordinary energy that was required to lead the life he led, with the disadvantages he laboured under from the first and the ones he brought on himself by his marriage. given that his opinions in politics and in religion were more odious to all persons of influence and to the common run of prosperous englishmen in that generation than either before or since; that he was a man whom nothing would have induced to write against his convictions, and who invariably threw into everything he wrote as much of his convictions as he thought the circumstances would in any way permit; and that he never did anything negligently, never undertook any literary or other task without conscientiously bestowing on it all the labour necessary for performing it adequately, it would have been no small thing if he had done no more than to support himself and his family during so many years by writing, without ever being in debt or in any financial difficulty. but with these burdens on him he planned, started, and completed the history of india, doing this in the course of about ten years, a shorter time than has been needed (even by writers with no other employment) to produce almost any other historical work of equal size or as much reading and research. and during this whole period a considerable part of almost every day was employed in the instruction of his children. in the case of one of these, myself, he exerted an amount of labour, care, and perseverance rarely if ever employed for a similar purpose, trying to give the highest order of intellectual education according to his own conception of this.

a man who, in his own practice, so vigorously acted up to the principle of losing no time, was likely to adhere to the same rule in the instruction of his pupil. i have no remembrance of the time when i began to learn greek; i have been told that it was when i was three years old. my earliest recollection on the subject, is that of committing to memory what my father termed vocables, being lists of common greek words, with their signification in english, which he wrote out for me on cards. of grammar, until some years later, i learnt no more than the inflections of the nouns and verbs, but, after a course of vocables, proceeded at once to translation; and i faintly remember going through aesop's fables, the first greek book which i read. the anabasis, which i remember better, was the second. i learnt no latin until my eighth year. at that time i had read, under my father's tuition, a number of greek prose authors, among whom i remember the whole of herodotus, and of xenophon's cyropaedia and memorials of socrates; some of the lives of the philosophers by diogenes laertius; part of lucian, and isocrates ad demonicum and ad nicoclem. i also read, in 1813, the first six dialogues (in the common arrangement) of plato, from the euthyphron to the theoctetus inclusive: which last dialogue, i venture to think, would have been better omitted, as it was totally impossible i should understand it. but my father, in all his teaching, demanded of me not only the utmost that i could do, but much that i could by no possibility have done. what he was himself willing to undergo for the sake of my instruction, may be judged from the fact, that i went through the whole process of preparing my greek lessons in the same room and at the same table at which he was writing: and as in those days greek and english lexicons were not, and i could make no more use of a greek and latin lexicon than could be made without having yet begun to learn latin, i was forced to have recourse to him for the meaning of every word which i did not know. this incessant interruption, he, one of the most impatient of men, submitted to, and wrote under that interruption several volumes of his history and all else that he had to write during those years.
starting greek at the age of 3 a man who in his own conduct so vigorously acted up to the principle of losing no time was likely to adhere to the same rule in the instruction of his pupil. i have no memory of the time when i began to learn greek. i have been told that it was when i was three years old. my earliest recollection on the subject is of committing to memory what my father termed vocables lists of common greek words with their meanings in english, which he wrote out for me on cards. until some years later the only greek grammar that i learned was the inflexions of the nouns and verbs, but after a course of vocables i proceeded at once to translation; and i faintly remember going through aesop's fables, the first greek book i read. the anabasis of xenophon, which i remember better, was the second. i learned no latin until my eighth year. at that time i had under my father's tuition read a number of greek prose authors, among whom i remember the whole of herodotus, and of xenophon's cyropaedia and memorials of socrates; some of the lives of the philosophers by diogenes laertius; part of lucian, and isocrates ad demonicum and ad nicoclem. i also read, in 1813, the first six dialogues (in the common arrangement) of plato, from euthyphro to theaetetus inclusive. i venture to think that that last dialogue would have been better omitted, as it was totally impossible that i should understand it. but in all his teaching my father demanded of me not only the utmost that i could do but much that i could not possibly have done. what he was himself willing to undergo for the sake of my instruction may be judged from the fact that i went through the whole process of preparing my greek lessons at the same table at which he was writing: and as in those days greek-english dictionaries did not exist and i could make no use of a greek-latin dictionary because i had not yet begun to learn latin, i had to appeal to him for the meaning of every word that i did not know. though one of the most impatient of men, he submitted to this incessant interruption, and wrote under that interruption several volumes of his history and everything else that he had to write during those years. history etc.

the only thing besides greek, that i learnt as a lesson in this part of my childhood, was arithmetic: this also my father taught me: it was the task of the evenings, and i well remember its disagreeableness. but the lessons were only a part of the daily instruction i received. much of it consisted in the books i read by myself, and my father's discourses to me, chiefly during our walks. from 1810 to the end of 1813 we were living in newington green, then an almost rustic neighbourhood. my father's health required considerable and constant exercise, and he walked habitually before breakfast, generally in the green lanes towards hornsey. in these walks i always accompanied him, and with my earliest recollections of green fields and wild flowers, is mingled that of the account i gave him daily of what i had read the day before. to the best of my remembrance, this was a voluntary rather than a prescribed exercise. i made notes on slips of paper while reading, and from these in the morning walks, i told the story to him; for the books were chiefly histories, of which i read in this manner a great number: robertson's histories, hume, gibbon; but my greatest delight, then and for long afterwards, was watson's philip the second and third. the heroic defence of the knights of malta against the turks, and of the revolted provinces of the netherlands against spain, excited in me an intense and lasting interest. next to watson, my favourite historical reading was hooke's history of rome. of greece i had seen at that time no regular history, except school abridgments and the last two or three volumes of a translation of rollin's ancient history, beginning with philip of macedon. but i read with great delight langhorne's translation of plutarch. in english history, beyond the time at which hume leaves off, i remember reading burnet's history of his own time, though i cared little for anything in it except the wars and battles; and the historical part of the annual register, from the beginning to about 1788, where the volumes my father borrowed for me from mr. bentham left off. i felt a lively interest in frederic of prussia during his difficulties, and in paoli, the corsican patriot; but when i came to the american war, i took my part, like a child as i was (until set right by my father) on the wrong side, because it was called the english side. in these frequent talks about the books i read, he used, as opportunity offered, to give me explanations and ideas respecting civilization, government, morality, mental cultivation, which he required me afterwards to restate to him in my own words. he also made me read, and give him a verbal account of, many books which would not have interested me sufficiently to induce me to read them of myself: among other's millar's historical view of the english government, a book of great merit for its time, and which he highly valued; mosheim's ecclesiastical history, mccrie's life of john knox, and even sewell and rutty's histories of the quakers. he was fond of putting into my hands books which exhibited men of energy and resource in unusual circumstances, struggling against difficulties and overcoming them: of such works i remember beaver's african memoranda, and collins's account of the first settlement of new south wales. two books which i never wearied of reading were anson's voyages, so delightful to most young persons, and a collection (hawkesworth's, i believe) of voyages round the world, in four volumes, beginning with drake and ending with cook and bougainville. of children's books, any more than of playthings, i had scarcely any, except an occasional gift from a relation or acquaintance: among those i had, robinson crusoe was pre-eminent, and continued to delight me through all my boyhood. it was no part, however, of my father's system to exclude books of amusement, though he allowed them very sparingly. of such books he possessed at that time next to none, but he borrowed several for me; those which i remember are the arabian nights, cazotte's arabian tales, don quixote, miss edgeworth's popular tales, and a book of some reputation in its day, brooke's fool of quality.
the only thing besides greek that i learned as a lesson in this part of my childhood was arithmetic. this also my father taught me; it was the task of the evenings, and i well remember its disagreeableness. but the lessons were only a part of the daily instruction i received. much of it consisted in the books i read by myself, and my father's discourses to me, chiefly during our walks. from 1810 to the end of 1813 we were living in newington green, then an almost rustic neighbourhood. my father's health required considerable and constant exercise, and he walked habitually before breakfast, generally in the green lanes towards hornsey. in these walks i always accompanied him, and my earliest recollections of green fields and wild flowers are mingled with memories of the account i daily gave him of what i had read the day before. to the best of my recollection this was a voluntary rather than a prescribed exercise. i made notes on slips of paper while reading, and from these in the morning walks i told the story to him. the books were chiefly histories, of which i read a great number in this manner: robertson's histories, hume, gibbon; but my greatest delight, then and for long afterwards, was watson's the reign of philip ii and the reign of phillip iii. the heroic defence of the knights of malta against the turks, and of the revolted provinces of the netherlands against spain, aroused in me an intense and lasting interest. next to watson, my favourite historical reading was hooke's history of rome. at that time i had seen no regular history of greece except school abridgments and the first two or three volumes of a translation of rollin's ancient history, beginning with philip of macedon. but i read with great delight langhorne's translation of plutarch. in english history, beyond the time at which hume leaves off, i remember reading burnet's history of my own time, though i cared little for anything in it except the wars and battles; and the historical part of the annual register from the beginning to about 1788, when the volumes my father borrowed for me from mr bentham left off. i felt a lively interest in frederick of prussia during his difficulties, and in the corsican patriot paoli; but when i came to the american war of independence, until i was set right by my father i took my part like the child that i was on the wrong side, because it was called the english side. as opportunity offered in these frequent talks about the books i read, he gave me explanations and ideas concerning civilisation, government, morality, mental cultivation, which he required me afterwards to state back to him in my own words. he also made me read and give him a verbal account of many books that would not have interested me enough for me to read them of myself: among others millar's historical view of the english government, a book of great merit for its time, which he highly valued; mosheim's ecclesiastical history, mccrie's life of john knox, and even sewel's and rutty's histories of the quakers. he was fond of putting into my hands books that showed men of energy and resource in unusual circumstances, struggling against difficulties and overcoming them: of such works i remember beaver's african memoranda and collins's account of the first settlement of new south wales. two books that i never wearied of reading were anson's voyage around the world, so delightful to most young persons, and a collection (hawkesworth's, i believe) of voyages around the world, in four volumes, beginning with drake and ending with cook and bougainville. i had scarcely any children's books (any more than i had toys) except an occasional gift from a relation or acquaintance; robinson crusoe was preeminent among those gifts, and continued to delight me through all my boyhood. it was no part of my father's system to exclude books of amusement, though he allowed them very sparingly. at that time he possessed almost no such books, but he borrowed several for me; the ones i remember are the arabian nights, cazotte's arabian tales, don quixote, miss edgeworth's popular tales and brooke's fool of quality, a book of some reputation in its day.

in my eighth year i commenced learning latin, in conjunction with a younger sister, to whom i taught it as i went on, and who afterwards repeated the lessons to my father; from this time, other sisters and brothers being successively added as pupils, a considerable part of my day's work consisted of this preparatory teaching. it was a part which i greatly disliked; the more so, as i was held responsible for the lessons of my pupils, in almost as full a sense as for my own: i, however, derived from this discipline the great advantage, of learning more thoroughly and retaining more lastingly the things which i was set to teach: perhaps, too, the practice it afforded in explaining difficulties to others, may even at that age have been useful. in other respects, the experience of my boyhood is not favourable to the plan of teaching children by means of one another. the teaching, i am sure, is very inefficient as teaching, and i well know that the relation between teacher and taught is not a good moral discipline to either. i went in this manner through the latin grammar, and a considerable part of cornelius nepos and caesar's commentaries, but afterwards added to the superintendence of these lessons, much longer ones of my own.
in my eighth year i began learning latin, along with a younger sister to whom i taught it as i went on, and who afterwards repeated the lessons to my father; and from this time, other sisters and brothers being successively added as pupils, a considerable part of my day's work consisted of this preparatory teaching. it was a part that i greatly disliked, especially because i was held responsible for the lessons of my pupils in almost as full a sense as for my own. however, i derived from this discipline the great advantage of learning more thoroughly, and retaining more lastingly, the things i was set to teach; and the practice it gave me in explaining difficulties to others may even at that age have been useful. in other respects the experience of my boyhood is not favourable to the plan of teaching children by means of one another. i am sure that the teaching is very inefficient as teaching, and i well knew that the relation between teacher and taught is not a good moral discipline for either. i went in this way through the latin grammar, and a considerable part of cornelius nepos and caesar's commentaries, but afterwards added to the superintendence of these lessons much longer ones of my own.

in the same year in which i began latin, i made my first commencement in the greek poets with the iliad. after i had made some progress in this, my father put pope's translation into my hands. it was the first english verse i had cared to read, and it became one of the books in which for many years i most delighted: i think i must have read it from twenty to thirty times through. i should not have thought it worth while to mention a taste apparently so natural to boyhood, if i had not, as i think, observed that the keen enjoyment of this brilliant specimen of narrative and versification is not so universal with boys, as i should have expected both a priori and from my individual experience. soon after this time i commenced euclid, and somewhat later, algebra, still under my father's tuition.
in the same year in which i began latin i made my start on the greek poets with the iliad. after i had made some progress in this, my father put pope's translation into my hands. it was the first english verse i had cared to read, and it became one of the books in which for many years i most delighted: i think i must have read it through from twenty to thirty times. i would not have thought it worthwhile to mention a taste apparently so natural to boyhood if i had not observed that the keen enjoyment of this brilliant specimen of narrative and versification is not as universal with boys as i would have expected both a priori and from my individual experience. soon after this time i commenced euclid, and somewhat later algebra, still under my father's tuition.

from my eighth to my twelfth year, the latin books which i remember reading were, the bucolics of virgil, and the first six books of the aeneid; all horace, except the epodes; the fables of phaedrus; the first five books of livy (to which from my love of the subject i voluntarily added, in my hours of leisure, the remainder of the first decade); all sallust; a considerable part of ovid's metamorphoses; some plays of terence; two or three books of lucretius; several of the orations of cicero, and of his writings on oratory; also his letters to atticus, my father taking the trouble to translate to me from the french the historical explanations in mingault's notes. in greek i read the iliad and odyssey through; one or two plays of sophocles, euripides, and aristophanes, though by these i profited little; all thucydides; the hellenics of xenophon; a great part of demosthenes, aeschines, and lysias; theocritus; anacreon; part of the anthology; a little of dionysius; several books of polybius; and lastly aristotle's rhetoric, which, as the first expressly scientific treatise on any moral or psychological subject which i had read, and containing many of the best observations of the ancients on human nature and life, my father made me study with peculiar care, and throw the matter of it into synoptic tables. during the same years i learnt elementary geometry and algebra thoroughly, the differential calculus, and other portions of the higher mathematics far from thoroughly: for my father, not having kept up this part of his early acquired knowledge, could not spare time to qualify himself for removing my difficulties, and left me to deal with them, with little other aid than that of books: while i was continually incurring his displeasure by my inability to solve difficult problems for which he did not see that i had not the necessary previous knowledge.
latin, greek poets from my eighth to my twelfth year the latin books i remember reading were the bucolics of virgil and the first six books of the aeneid; all of horace except the epodes; the fables of phaedrus; the first five books of livy (to which from my love of the subject i voluntarily added, in my hours of leisure, the next five); all of sallust; a considerable part of ovid's metamorphoses; some plays of terence; two or three books by lucretius; several of cicero's orations and of his writings on oratory; also his letters to atticus, my father taking the trouble to translate to me from the french the historical explanations in mongault's notes. in greek i read the iliad and odyssey through; one or two plays of sophocles, euripides, and aristophanes, though by these i profited little; all of thucydides; the hellenics of xenophon; a great part of demosthenes, aeschines, and lysias; theocritus; anacreon; part of the greek anthology; a little of dionysius; several books of polybius; and lastly aristotle's rhetoric, which my father made me study with special care, organising its content into synoptic tables, because it was the first expressly scientific treatise on any moral or psychological subject that i had read, and contained many of the best observations of the ancients on human nature and life. during the same years i learned elementary geometry and algebra thoroughly, and the differential calculus and other parts of higher mathematics far from thoroughly. that is because my father, not having kept up this part of his own early-acquired knowledge, could not spare time to equip himself to remove my difficulties, and left me to deal with them with little help except from books; while i continually incurred his displeasure by my inability to solve difficult problems for which he did not see that i lacked the necessary previous knowledge.

as to my private reading, i can only speak of what i remember. history continued to be my strongest predilection, and most of all ancient history. mitford's greece i read continually; my father had put me on my guard against the tory prejudices of this writer, and his perversions of facts for the whitewashing of despots, and blackening of popular institutions. these points he discoursed on, exemplifying them from the greek orators and historians, with such effect that in reading mitford my sympathies were always on the contrary side to those of the author, and i could, to some extent, have argued the point against him: yet this did not diminish the ever new pleasure with which i read the book. roman history, both in my old favourite, hooke, and in ferguson, continued to delight me. a book which, in spite of what is called the dryness of its style, i took great pleasure in, was the ancient universal history, through the incessant reading of which, i had my head full of historical details concerning the obscurest ancient people, while about modern history, except detached passages, such as the dutch war of independence, i knew and cared comparatively little. a voluntary exercise, to which throughout my boyhood i was much addicted, was what i called writing histories. i successively composed a roman history, picked out of hooke; and an abridgment of the ancient universal history; a history of holland, from my favourite watson and from an anonymous compilation; and in my eleventh and twelfth year i occupied myself with writing what i flattered myself was something serious. this was no less than a history of the roman government, compiled (with the assistance of hooke) from livy and dionysius: of which i wrote as much as would have made an octavo volume, extending to the epoch of the licinian laws. it was, in fact, an account of the struggles between the patricians and plebeians, which now engrossed all the interest in my mind which i had previously felt in the mere wars and conquests of the romans. i discussed all the constitutional points as they arose: though quite ignorant of niebuhr's researches, i, by such lights as my father had given me, vindicated the agrarian laws on the evidence of livy, and upheld, to the best of my ability, the roman democratic party. a few years later, in my contempt of my childish efforts, i destroyed all these papers, not then anticipating that i could ever feel any curiosity about my first attempts at writing and reasoning. my father encouraged me in this useful amusement, though, as i think judiciously, he never asked to see what i wrote; so that i did not feel that in writing it i was accountable to any one, nor had the chilling sensation of being under a critical eye.
as for my private reading, i can only speak of what i remember. history continued to be my strongest predilection, and most of all ancient history. i read mitford's greece continually; my father had put me on my guard against the tory prejudices of this writer and his perversions of facts for the white-washing of despots and the blackening of popular institutions. he talked to me on these points exemplifying them from the greek orators and historians so effectively that in reading mitford my sympathies were always on the opposite side to the author's, and i could to some extent have argued the point against him; but this did not diminish the always new pleasure with which i read the book. roman history continued to delight me both in my old favourite, hooke, and in ferguson. a book i took great pleasure in, despite its reputed dryness of style, was the ancient universal history, through the incessant reading of which i had my head full of historical details concerning the most obscure ancient people, while i knew and cared comparatively little about modern history except for detached episodes such as the dutch war of independence. a voluntary exercise to which i was much addicted throughout my boyhood was what i called writing histories. i successively composed a roman history, picked out of hooke; an abridgment of the ancient universal history; a history of holland, from my favourite watson and from an anonymous compilation; and in my eleventh and twelfth year i occupied myself with writing what i flattered myself was something serious. this was no less than a history of the roman government, compiled (with the assistance of hooke) from livy and dionysius: of which i wrote as much as would have made an octavo volume, extending to the epoch of the licinian laws. it was in fact an account of the struggles between the patricians and plebeians that now attracted all the interest i had previously felt in the romans mere wars and conquests. i discussed all the institutional points as they arose; although quite ignorant of niebuhr's researches, i (by such lights as my father had given me) vindicated the agrarian laws on the evidence of livy, and upheld to the best of my ability the roman democratic party. a few years later, in my disregard of my childish efforts, i destroyed all these papers, not then expecting that i would ever be curious about my first attempt at writing and reasoning. my father encouraged me in this useful pastime, though (judiciously, i think) he never asked to see what i wrote; so that i did not feel that in writing it i was accountable to anyone, nor had the chilling sensation of being under a critical eye.

but though these exercises in history were never a compulsory lesson, there was another kind of composition which was so, namely, writing verses, and it was one of the most disagreeable of my tasks. greek and latin verses i did not write, nor learnt the prosody of those languages. my father, thinking this not worth the time it required, contented himself with making me read aloud to him, and correcting false quantities. i never composed at all in greek, even in prose, and but little in latin. not that my father could be indifferent to the value of this practice, in giving a thorough knowledge of these languages, but because there really was not time for it. the verses i was required to write were english. when i first read pope's homer, i ambitiously attempted to compose something of the same kind, and achieved as much as one book of a continuation of the iliad. there, probably, the spontaneous promptings of my poetical ambition would have stopped; but the exercise, begun from choice, was continued by command. conformably to my father's usual practice of explaining to me, as far as possible, the reasons for what he required me to do, he gave me, for this, as i well remember, two reasons highly characteristic of him: one was, that some things could be expressed better and more forcibly in verse than in prose: this, he said, was a real advantage. the other was, that people in general attached more value to verse than it deserved, and the power of writing it, was, on this account, worth acquiring. he generally left me to choose my own subjects, which, as far as i remember, were mostly addresses to some mythological personage or allegorical abstraction; but he made me translate into english verse many of horace's shorter poems: i also remember his giving me thomson's winter to read, and afterwards making me attempt (without book) to write something myself on the same subject. the verses i wrote were, of course, the merest rubbish, nor did i ever attain any facility of versification, but the practice may have been useful in making it easier for me, at a later period, to acquire readiness of expression. i had read, up to this time, very little english poetry. shakspeare my father had put into my hands, chiefly for the sake of the historical plays, from which, however, i went on to the others. my father never was a great admirer of shakspeare, the english idolatry of whom he used to attack with some severity. he cared little for any english poetry except milton (for whom he had the highest admiration), goldsmith, burns, and gray's bard, which he preferred to his elegy: perhaps i may add cowper and beattie. he had some value for spenser, and i remember his reading to me (unlike his usual practice of making me read to him) the first book of the fairie queene; but i took little pleasure in it. the poetry of the present century he saw scarcely any merit in, and i hardly became acquainted with any of it till i was grown up to manhood, except the metrical romances of walter scott, which i read at his recommendation and was intensely delighted with; as i always was with animated narrative. dryden's poems were among my father's books, and many of these he made me read, but i never cared for any of them except alexander's feast, which, as well as many of the songs in walter scott, i used to sing internally, to a music of my own: to some of the latter, indeed, i went so far as to compose airs, which i still remember. cowper's short poems i read with some pleasure, but never got far into the longer ones; and nothing in the two volumes interested me like the prose account of his three hares. in my thirteenth year i met with campbell's poems, among which lochiel, hohenlinden, the exile of erin, and some others, gave me sensations i had never before experienced from poetry. here, too, i made nothing of the longer poems, except the striking opening of gertrude of wyoming, which long kept its place in my feelings as the perfection of pathos.
poetry but though these exercises in history were never a compulsory lesson, there was another kind of composition which was so, namely writing verses, and it was one of the most disagreeable of my tasks. i did not write greek and latin verses or learn the prosody of those languages. my father thought this was not worth the time it required, and contented himself with making me read aloud to him, and correcting false quantities. i never composed at all in greek, even in prose, and not much in latin. it wasn't that my father was indifferent to the value of this practice in giving a thorough knowledge of those languages, but there really was not time for it. the verses i was required to write were english. when i first read pope's homer, i ambitiously tried to compose something of the same kind, and achieved as much as one book of a continuation of the iliad. the spontaneous promptings of my poetical ambition would have stopped there; but the exercise, begun from choice, was continued by command. in line with my father's usual practice of explaining to me, as far as possible, the reasons for what he required me to do, he gave me two reasons for this that were highly characteristic of him. one was that some things could be better and more forcibly expressed in verse than in prose; this, he said, was a real advantage. the other was that people in general attached more value to verse than it deserved, and the power of writing it was therefore worth acquiring. he generally left me to choose my own subjects, which (as far as i remember) were mostly addresses to some mythological personage or allegorical abstraction; but he made me translate into english verse many of horace's shorter poems; i also remember his giving me thomson's winter to read, and afterwards making me attempt (without book) to write something on the same subject. the verses i wrote were of course mere rubbish, and i never achieved any skill in versification; but the practice may have been useful in making it easier for me in later years to acquire readiness of expression. up to this time i had read very little english poetry. my father had put shakespeare into my hands, chiefly for the sake of the historical plays, from which i went on to the others. my father never was a great admirer of shakespeare, the english idolatry of whom he used to attack with some severity. he cared little for any english poetry except milton (for whom he had the highest admiration), goldsmith, burns, and gray's bard, which he preferred to his elegy; perhaps i may add cowper and beattie. he had some value for spenser, and i remember his reading to me (unlike his usual practice of making me read to him) the first book of the fairie queene, but i took little pleasure in it. he saw scarcely any merit in the poetry of the present century, and i hardly became acquainted with any of it until my adult years, except the metrical romances of walter scott which i read at his recommendation and was intensely delighted with, as i always was with any lively narrative. dryden's poems were among my father's books, and many of these he made me read, but i never cared for any of them except alexander's feast, which i used to sing internally to a music of my own. i did the same with many of the songs in walter scott, for some of which i went so far as to compose tunes which i still remember. i read cowper's short poems with some pleasure, but never got far into the longer ones; and nothing in the two volumes interested me like the prose account of his three hares. in my thirteenth year i met with campbell's poems, some of which gave me sensations i had never before experienced from poetry. i made nothing of the longer poems, except the opening of gertrude of wyoming, which long kept its place in my feelings as the perfection of pathos.

during this part of my childhood, one of my greatest amusements was experimental science; in the theoretical, however, not the practical sense of the word; not trying experiments a kind of discipline which i have often regretted not having had nor even seeing, but merely reading about them. i never remember being so wrapt up in any book, as i was in joyce's scientific dialogues; and i was rather recalcitrant to my father's criticisms of the bad reasoning respecting the first principles of physics, which abounds in the early part of that work. i devoured treatises on chemistry, especially that of my father's early friend and schoolfellow, dr. thomson, for years before i attended a lecture or saw an experiment.
one of my greatest amusements during this part of my childhood was experimental science, in the theoretical sense of the word, however, not the practical one. i did not try experiments a kind of discipline that i have often regretted not having had and did not even see any, but merely read about them. i never remember being so wrapped up in any book as i was in joyce's scientific dialogues; and i was rather reluctant to accept my father's criticisms of the bad reasoning about the first principles of physics that abounds in the early part of that work. i devoured treatises on chemistry, especially that of my father's early friend and schoolfellow, dr thomson, for years before i attended a lecture or saw an experiment. logic

from about the age of twelve, i entered into another and more advanced stage in my course of instruction; in which the main object was no longer the aids and appliances of thought, but the thoughts themselves. this commenced with logic, in which i began at once with the organon, and read it to the analytics inclusive, but profited little by the posterior analytics, which belong to a branch of speculation i was not yet ripe for. contemporaneously with the organon, my father made me read the whole or parts of several of the latin treatises on the scholastic logic; giving each day to him, in our walks, a minute account of what i had read, and answering his numerous and most searching questions. after this, i went in a similar manner through the computatio sive logica of hobbes, a work of a much higher order of thought than the books of the school logicians, and which he estimated very highly; in my own opinion beyond its merits, great as these are. it was his invariable practice, whatever studies he exacted from me, to make me as far as possible understand and feel the utility of them: and this he deemed peculiarly fitting in the case of the syllogistic logic, the usefulness of which had been impugned by so many writers of authority. i well remember how, and in what particular walk, in the neighbourhood of bagshot heath (where we were on a visit to his old friend mr. wallace, then one of the mathematical professors at sandhurst) he first attempted by questions to make me think on the subject, and frame some conception of what constituted the utility of the syllogistic logic, and when i had failed in this, to make me understand it by explanations. the explanations did not make the matter at all clear to me at the time; but they were not therefore useless; they remained as a nucleus for my observations and reflections to crystallize upon; the import of his general remarks being interpreted to me, by the particular instances which came under my notice afterwards. my own consciousness and experience ultimately led me to appreciate quite as highly as he did, the value of an early practical familiarity with the school logic. i know of nothing, in my education, to which i think myself more indebted for whatever capacity of thinking i have attained. the first intellectual operation in which i arrived at any proficiency, was dissecting a bad argument, and finding in what part the fallacy lay: and though whatever capacity of this sort i attained, was due to the fact that it was an intellectual exercise in which i was most perseveringly drilled by my father, yet it is also true that the school logic, and the mental habits acquired in studying it, were among the principal instruments of this drilling. i am persuaded that nothing, in modern education, tends so much, when properly used, to form exact thinkers, who attach a precise meaning to words and propositions, and are not imposed on by vague, loose, or ambiguous terms. the boasted influence of mathematical studies is nothing to it; for in mathematical processes, none of the real difficulties of correct ratiocination occur. it is also a study peculiarly adapted to an early stage in the education of philosophical students, since it does not presuppose the slow process of acquiring, by experience and reflection, valuable thoughts of their own. they may become capable of disentangling the intricacies of confused and self-contradictory thought, before their own thinking faculties are much advanced; a power which, for want of some such discipline, many otherwise able men altogether lack; and when they have to answer opponents, only endeavour, by such arguments as they can command, to support the opposite conclusion, scarcely even attempting to confute the reasonings of their antagonists; and, therefore, at the utmost, leaving the question, as far as it depends on argument, a balanced one.
from about the age of twelve i entered into a more advanced stage in my course of instruction, in which the main object was no longer the aids and appliances of thought but the thoughts themselves. this started with logic, in which i began at once with the organon of aristotle and read it up to and including the analytics, but profited little from the posterior analytics, which belongs to a branch of speculation i was not yet ripe for. along with the organon my father made me read the whole or parts of several of the latin treatises on the scholastic logic; giving him each day on our walks a minute account of what i had read, and answering his numerous and searching questions. after this i went in a similar way through the computatio sive logica of hobbes, a work of a much higher order of thought than the books of the scholastic logicians, and which he estimated very highly in my opinion beyond its merits, great as these are. it was his invariable practice, whatever studies he required from me, to make me as far as possible understand and feel the utility of them; and he regarded this as especially fitting in the case of the syllogistic logic, the usefulness of which had been challenged by so many writers of authority. i well remember how, and in what particular walk in the neighbourhood of bagshot heath (where we were on a visit to his old friend mr wallace, then one of the mathematical professors at sandhurst), he first tried by questions to make me think about this subject and develop some conception of what made syllogistic logic useful, and (when i had failed in this) to make me understand it by explanations. the explanations did not make the matter at all clear to me at the time, but they were not useless; they remained as a nucleus for my observations and reflections to crystallise on, because the import of his general remarks was later interpreted to me by the particular instances that came under my notice. my own consciousness and experience eventually led me to appreciate quite as highly as he did the value of an early practical familiarity with scholastic logic. i know nothing in my education to which i think myself more indebted for whatever capacity of thinking i have attained. the first intellectual operation in which i arrived at any proficiency was dissecting a bad argument and finding where in it the fallacy lay; and though whatever ability of this sort i achieved was due to its being an intellectual exercise in which i was perseveringly drilled by my father, it is also true that the scholastic logic, and the mental habits acquired in studying it, were among the principal instruments of this drilling. i am persuaded that nothing in modern education tends so much, when properly used, to form exact thinkers who attach a precise meaning to words and propositions and are not imposed on by vague, loose, or ambiguous terms. the boasted influence of mathematical studies is nothing to it; for in mathematical processes none of the real difficulties of correct reasoning occur. it is also a suitable study for an early stage in the education of philosophical students, because it does not involve the students in the slow process of acquiring by experience and reflection valuable thoughts of their own. they may become capable of disentangling the intricacies of confused and self-contradictory thought before their own thinking faculties are much advanced; a capability that many otherwise able men altogether lack because they were never subjected to some such discipline. when such men have to answer opponents they try by such argument as they can command to support their own side, scarcely even trying to confute the reasonings of their antagonists; so that at best they leave the question, as far as it depends on argument, a balanced one.

during this time, the latin and greek books which i continued to read with my father were chiefly such as were worth studying, not for the language merely, but also for the thoughts. this included much of the orators, and especially demosthenes, some of whose principal orations i read several times over, and wrote out, by way of exercise, a full analysis of them. my father's comments on these orations when i read them to him were very instructive to me. he not only drew my attention to the insight they afforded into athenian institutions, and the principles of legislation and government which they often illustrated, but pointed out the skill and art of the orator how everything important to his purpose was said at the exact moment when he had brought the minds of his audience into the state most fitted to receive it; how he made steal into their minds, gradually and by insinuation, thoughts which, if expressed in a more direct manner, would have roused their opposition. most of these reflections were beyond my capacity of full comprehension at the time; but they left seed behind, which germinated in due season. at this time i also read the whole of tacitus, juvenal, and quintilian. the latter, owing to his obscure style and to the scholastic details of which many parts of his treatise are made up, is little read, and seldom sufficiently appreciated. his book is a kind of encyclopaedia of the thoughts of the ancients on the whole field of education and culture; and i have retained through life many valuable ideas which i can distinctly trace to my reading of him, even at that early age. it was at this period that i read, for the first time, some of the most important dialogues of plato, in particular the gorgias, the protagoras, and the republic. there is no author to whom my father thought himself more indebted for his own mental culture, than plato, or whom he more frequently recommended to young students. i can bear similar testimony in regard to myself. the socratic method, of which the platonic dialogues are the chief example, is unsurpassed as a discipline for correcting the errors, and clearing up the confusions incident to the intellectus sibi permissus, the understanding which has made up all its bundles of associations under the guidance of popular phraseology. the close, searching elenchus by which the man of vague generalities is constrained either to express his meaning to himself in definite terms, or to confess that he does not know what he is talking about; the perpetual testing of all general statements by particular instances; the siege in form which is laid to the meaning of large abstract terms, by fixing upon some still larger class-name which includes that and more, and dividing down to the thing sought marking out its limits and definition by a series of accurately drawn distinctions between it and each of the cognate objects which are successively parted off from it all this, as an education for precise thinking, is inestimable, and all this, even at that age, took such hold of me that it became part of my own mind. i have felt ever since that the title of platonist belongs by far better right to those who have been nourished in and have endeavoured to practise plato's mode of investigation, than to those who are distinguished only by the adoption of certain dogmatical conclusions, drawn mostly from the least intelligible of his works, and which the character of his mind and writings makes it uncertain whether he himself regarded as anything more than poetic fancies, or philosophic conjectures.
most of the latin and greek books that i continued to read with my father at this time were worth studying not merely for the language but also for the thoughts. this included much of the orators, and especially demosthenes, some of whose principal orations i read several times over and wrote out (by way of exercise) a full analysis of them. my father's comments on these orations when i read them to him were very instructive to me. he not only drew my attention to the insight they afforded into athenian institutions, and the principles of legislation and government they often illustrated, but pointed out the skill and art of the orator how everything important to his purpose was said at the exact moment when he had brought his audience's minds into the state most fitted to receive it; how he made steal into their minds, gradually and by insinuation, thoughts that would have aroused their opposition if expressed more directly. i could not fully grasp many of these reflections at the time, but they left seed which germinated in due season. at this time i also read the whole of tacitus, juvenal, and quintilian. the latter, owing to his obscure style and to the scholarly details of which many parts of his treatise are made up, is little read and seldom sufficiently appreciated. his book is a kind of encyclopedia of the thoughts of the ancients on the whole field of education and culture; and i have retained through life many valuable ideas which i can distinctly trace to my reading of him, even at that early age. this was when i read for the first time some of plato's most important dialogues, in particular the gorgias, the protagoras, and the republic. there is no author to whom my father thought himself more indebted for his own mental culture than plato, or whom he more frequently recommended to young students. i can bear similar testimony in regard to myself. the socratic method of which the platonic dialogues are the chief example is unsurpassed as a discipline for correcting the errors and clearing up the confusions created by the intellect left to itself, i.e. by the understanding that has made up all its bundles of associations under the guidance of popular phraseology. the searching question-and-answer procedure by which the man of vague generalities is made to express his meaning to himself in definite terms or else admit that he doesn't know what he is talking about; the perpetual testing of all general statements by particular instances; the formal attack on the meaning of a large abstract term m by fixing on some even broader class-name that includes m and more, and dividing down to m, marking out its limits and definition by a series careful distinctions between it and each of the cognate objects that are successively cut away from it all this is an inestimable education for precise thinking, and it took such a hold of me even at that age that it became part of my own mind. ever since then i have felt that the label platonist belongs by far better right to those who have been nourished in and tried to practise plato's mode of investigation than to those who are distinguished only by having adopted certain dogmatic conclusions, drawn mostly from the least intelligible of his works ones that plato himself may (the character of his mind and writings makes it uncertain) have regarded as mere poetic fancies or philosophical conjectures.

in going through plato and demosthenes, since i could now read these authors, as far as the language was concerned, with perfect ease, i was not required to construe them sentence by sentence, but to read them aloud to my father, answering questions when asked: but the particular attention which he paid to elocution (in which his own excellence was remarkable) made this reading aloud to him a most painful task. of all things which he required me to do, there was none which i did so constantly ill, or in which he so perpetually lost his temper with me. he had thought much on the principles of the art of reading, especially the most neglected part of it, the inflections of the voice, or modulation, as writers on elocution call it (in contrast with articulation on the one side, and expression on the other), and had reduced it to rules, grounded on the logical analysis of a sentence. these rules he strongly impressed upon me, and took me severely to task for every violation of them: but i even then remarked (though i did not venture to make the remark to him) that though he reproached me when i read a sentence ill, and told me how i ought to have read it, he never by reading it himself, showed me how it ought to be read. a defect running through his otherwise admirable modes of instruction, as it did through all his modes of thought, was that of trusting too much to the intelligibleness of the abstract, when not embodied in the concrete. it was at a much later period of my youth, when practising elocution by myself, or with companions of my own age, that i for the first time understood the object of his rules, and saw the psychological grounds of them. at that time i and others followed out the subject into its ramifications, and could have composed a very useful treatise, grounded on my father's principles. he himself left those principles and rules unwritten. i regret that when my mind was full of the subject, from systematic practice, i did not put them, and our improvements of them, into a formal shape.
in going through plato and demosthenes, since i could now read these authors (as far as the language was concerned) with perfect ease, i was not required to construe them sentence by sentence, but to read them aloud to my father, answering questions when asked. but his particular attention to elocution (in which his own excellence was remarkable) made this reading aloud to him a most painful task. of all the things he required me to do there was none that i so constantly did badly or in which he so perpetually lost his temper with me. he had thought much about the principles of the art of reading, especially the most neglected part of it, namely the inflections of the voice what writers on elocution call modulation (in contrast with articulation on one side and expression on the other) and had reduced it to rules based on the logical analysis of a sentence. he strongly impressed these rules upon me, and took me severely to task for every violation of them; but even then i noticed (though i did not venture to say so to him) that though he reproached me when i read a sentence badly and told me how i ought to have read it, he never by reading it himself showed me how it ought to be read. a defect running through his otherwise admirable modes of instruction, as through all his modes of thought, was that of trusting too much to the intelligibleness of the abstract when not embodied in the concrete. it was much later in my youth, when practising elocution by myself or with companions of my own age, that i eventually understood the purpose of his rules and saw the psychological grounds of them. at that time i and others followed out the subject into its ramifications and could have composed a very useful treatise based on my father's principles. he himself left those principles and rules unwritten. i regret that when systematic practice had filled my mind with the subject i did not put them, and our improvements of them, into a formal shape.

a book which contributed largely to my education, in the best sense of the term, was my father's history of india. it was published in the beginning of 1818. during the year previous, while it was passing through the press, i used to read the proof sheets to him; or rather, i read the manuscript to him while he corrected the proofs. the number of new ideas which i received from this remarkable book, and the impulse and stimulus as well as guidance given to my thoughts by its criticism and disquisitions on society and civilization in the hindoo part, on institutions and the acts of governments in the english part, made my early familiarity with it eminently useful to my subsequent progress. and though i can perceive deficiencies in it now as compared with a perfect standard, i still think it, if not the most, one of the most instructive histories ever written, and one of the books from which most benefit may be derived by a mind in the course of making up its opinions.
the history of india a book that contributed largely to my education, in the best sense of the term, was my father's history of india. it was published at the beginning of 1818. during the preceding year when it was passing through the press i used to read the proof-sheets to him; or rather i read the manuscript to him while he corrected the proofs. the number of new ideas i received from this remarkable book, and the impulse and stimulus as well as guidance given to my thoughts by its criticisms and discussions of society and civilisation in the hindu part, on institutions and the acts of governments in the english part, made my early familiarity with it enormously useful to my subsequent progress. and though i can now see deficiencies in it as compared with a perfect standard, i still think it one of the most instructive histories ever written if not the most and one of the books from which most benefit can be derived by a mind engaged in making up its opinions.

the preface, among the most characteristic of my father's writings, as well as the richest in materials of thought, gives a picture which may be entirely depended on, of the sentiments and expectations with which he wrote the history. saturated as the book is with the opinions and modes of judgment of a democratic radicalism then regarded as extreme; and treating with a severity, at that time most unusual, the english constitution, the english law, and all parties and classes who possessed any considerable influence in the country; he may have expected reputation, but certainly not advancement in life, from its publication; nor could he have supposed that it would raise up anything but enemies for him in powerful quarters: least of all could he have expected favour from the east india company, to whose commercial privileges he was unqualifiedly hostile, and on the acts of whose government he had made so many severe comments: though, in various parts of his book, he bore a testimony in their favour, which he felt to be their just due, namely, that no government had on the whole given so much proof, to the extent of its lights, of good intention towards its subjects; and that if the acts of any other government had the light of publicity as completely let in upon them, they would, in all probability, still less bear scrutiny.
the preface, one of my father's most characteristic writings as well as the richest in materials of thought, gives a picture that can be entirely depended on of the beliefs and expectations with which he wrote the history. saturated as the book is with the opinions and modes of judgment of a democratic radicalism then regarded as extreme; and treating english constitution, english law, and all parties and classes with any considerable influence in the country with a severity that was at that time most unusual; he may have expected reputation, but certainly not advancement in life, from its publication. nor could he have supposed that it would raise up anything but enemies for him in powerful quarters; least of all could he have expected favour from the east india company, to whose commercial privileges he was absolutely hostile and on the acts of whose government he had made so many severe comments; though in various parts of his book he testified in their favour (as he felt to be their just due) that no government had on the whole given so much proof of good intention towards its subjects, and that if the light of publicity were focused on the acts of any other government they would probably look even worse.

on learning, however, in the spring of 1819, about a year after the publication of the history, that the east india directors desired to strengthen the part of their home establishment which was employed in carrying on the correspondence with india, my father declared himself a candidate for that employment, and, to the credit of the directors, successfully. he was appointed one of the assistants of the examiner of india correspondence; officers whose duty it was to prepare drafts of despatches to india, for consideration by the directors, in the principal departments of administration. in this office, and in that of examiner, which he subsequently attained, the influence which his talents, his reputation, and his decision of character gave him, with superiors who really desired the good government of india, enabled him to a great extent to throw into his drafts of despatches, and to carry through the ordeal of the court of directors and board of control, without having their force much weakened, his real opinions on indian subjects. in his history he had set forth, for the first time, many of the true principles of indian administration: and his despatches, following his history, did more than had ever been done before to promote the improvement of india, and teach indian officials to understand their business. if a selection of them were published, they would, i am convinced, place his character as a practical statesman fully on a level with his eminence as a speculative writer.
however, when my father learned in the spring of 1819, about a year after the publication of the history that the east india directors wanted to strengthen the part of their home establishment that was employed in carrying on the correspondence with india, he declared himself a candidate for that employment and, to the credit of the directors, he succeeded. he was appointed one of the assistants of the examiner of india correspondence officers whose duty it was to prepare drafts of despatches to india, for consideration by the directors, in the principal departments of administration. in this office, and in that of examiner which he subsequently attained, the influence which his talents, his reputation, and his decision of character gave him with superiors who really desired the good government of india, enabled him to a great extent to throw his real opinions on indian subjects into his drafts of despatches, and to carry through the ordeal of the court of directors and board of control without having the opinions force much weakened. in his history he had set forth for the first time many of the true principles of indian administration; and his despatches, following his history, did more than had ever been done before to promote the improvement of india and teach indian officials to understand their business. if a selection of them were published, they would, i am convinced, place his character as a practical statesman fully on a level with his eminence as a speculative writer.

this new employment of his time caused no relaxation in his attention to my education. it was in this same year, 1819, that he took me through a complete course of political economy. his loved and intimate friend, ricardo, had shortly before published the book which formed so great an epoch in political economy; a book which would never have been published or written, but for the entreaty and strong encouragement of my father; for ricardo, the most modest of men, though firmly convinced of the truth of his doctrines, deemed himself so little capable of doing them justice in exposition and expression, that he shrank from the idea of publicity. the same friendly encouragement induced ricardo, a year or two later, to become a member of the house of commons; where, during the remaining years of his life, unhappily cut short in the full vigour of his intellect, he rendered so much service to his and my father's opinions both on political economy and on other subjects.
this new employment of his time did not make him relax his attention to my education. it was in this same year, 1819, that he took me through a complete course of political economy. his loved and intimate friend david ricardo had shortly before published the book that created so great an epoch in political economy. this book would never have been written but for the entreaty and strong encouragement of my father; for ricardo, the most modest of men, though firmly convinced of the truth of his doctrines, shrank from the idea of publicity because he regarded himself as so little capable of doing them justice in exposition and expression. the same friendly encouragement induced ricardo to become a member of the house of commons a year or two later. there, during the few remaining years of his life (unhappily cut short in the full vigour of his intellect) he rendered much service to his and my father's opinions on political economy and on other subjects.

though ricardo's great work was already in print, no didactic treatise embodying its doctrines, in a manner fit for learners, had yet appeared. my father, therefore, commenced instructing me in the science by a sort of lectures, which he delivered to me in our walks. he expounded each day a portion of the subject, and i gave him next day a written account of it, which he made me rewrite over and over again until it was clear, precise, and tolerably complete. in this manner i went through the whole extent of the science; and the written outline of it which resulted from my daily compte rendu, served him afterwards as notes from which to write his elements of political economy. after this i read ricardo, giving an account daily of what i read, and discussing, in the best manner i could, the collateral points which offered themselves in our progress.
though ricardo's great work was already in print, there was no textbook presenting its doctrines in a manner fit for learners. so my father started instructing me in the science of economics by a sort of lectures that he delivered to me during our walks. he expounded a portion of the subject each day, and i gave him next day a written account of it, which he made me rewrite over and over again until it was clear, precise, and tolerably complete. i went through the whole extent of the science in this way; and the written outline of it that resulted from my daily reports served him afterwards as notes from which to write his elements of political economy. after this i read ricardo, giving an account daily of what i read, and discussing as best i could the collateral points that came up in our progress.

on money, as the most intricate part of the subject, he made me read in the same manner ricardo's admirable pamphlets, written during what was called the bullion controversy; to these succeeded adam smith; and in this reading it was one of my father's main objects to make me apply to smith's more superficial view of political economy, the superior lights of ricardo, and detect what was fallacious in smith's arguments, or erroneous in any of his conclusions. such a mode of instruction was excellently calculated to form a thinker; but it required to be worked by a thinker, as close and vigorous as my father. the path was a thorny one, even to him, and i am sure it was so to me, notwithstanding the strong interest i took in the subject. he was often, and much beyond reason, provoked by my failures in cases where success could not have been expected; but in the main his method was right, and it succeeded. i do not believe that any scientific teaching ever was more thorough, or better fitted for training the faculties, than the mode in which logic and political economy were taught to me by my father. striving, even in an exaggerated degree, to call forth the activity of my faculties, by making me find out everything for myself, he gave his explanations not before, but after, i had felt the full force of the difficulties; and not only gave me an accurate knowledge of these two great subjects, as far as they were then understood, but made me a thinker on both. i thought for myself almost from the first, and occasionally thought differently from him, though for a long time only on minor points, and making his opinion the ultimate standard. at a later period i even occasionally convinced him, and altered his opinion on some points of detail: which i state to his honour, not my own. it at once exemplifies his perfect candour, and the real worth of his method of teaching.
on money, as the most intricate part of the subject, he made me read in the same manner ricardo's admirable pamphlets written during the so-called bullion controversy. these were followed by adam smith; and one of my father's main objects in this reading was to make me apply to smith's more superficial view of political economy the superior lights of ricardo, and to detect what was fallacious in smith's arguments or erroneous in any of his conclusions. such a method of instruction was excellently calculated to form a thinker; but it had to be done by a thinker as close and vigorous as my father. the path was a thorny one, even to him, and i am sure it was so to me despite my strong interest in the subject. he was often unreasonably annoyed by my failures in cases where success could not have been expected; but in the main his method was right, and it succeeded. i do not believe that any scientific teaching ever was more thorough, or better fitted for training the faculties, than the mode in which logic and political economy were taught to me by my father. trying (perhaps too hard) to call forth the activity of my faculties by making me find out everything for myself, he gave his explanations only after i had felt the full force of the difficulties; and he not only gave me an accurate knowledge of these two great subjects, as far as they were then understood, but made me a thinker in both. i thought for myself almost from the first, and occasionally thought differently from him, though for a long time only on minor points and making his opinion the ultimate standard. at a later period i occasionally even altered his opinion on points of detail, which i state to his honour, not my own. it shows both his perfect candour and the real worth of his method of teaching.

at this point concluded what can properly be called my lessons: when i was about fourteen i left england for more than a year; and after my return, though my studies went on under my father's general direction, he was no longer my schoolmaster. i shall therefore pause here, and turn back to matters of a more general nature connected with the part of my life and education included in the preceding reminiscences.
at this point concluded my lessons, strictly so-called; when i was about 14 i left england for more than a year; and after my return, though my studies went on under my father's general direction, he was no longer my schoolmaster. so i shall pause here and turn back to matters of a more general nature connected with the part of my life and education i have been talking about. general points about early education

in the course of instruction which i have partially retraced, the point most superficially apparent is the great effort to give, during the years of childhood, an amount of knowledge in what are considered the higher branches of education, which is seldom acquired (if acquired at all) until the age of manhood. the result of the experiment shows the ease with which this may be done, and places in a strong light the wretched waste of so many precious years as are spent in acquiring the modicum of latin and greek commonly taught to schoolboys; a waste which has led so many educational reformers to entertain the ill-judged proposal of discarding these languages altogether from general education. if i had been by nature extremely quick of apprehension, or had possessed a very accurate and retentive memory, or were of a remarkably active and energetic character, the trial would not be conclusive; but in all these natural gifts i am rather below than above par; what i could do, could assuredly be done by any boy or girl of average capacity and healthy physical constitution: and if i have accomplished anything, i owe it, among other fortunate circumstances, to the fact that through the early training bestowed on me by my father, i started, i may fairly say, with an advantage of a quarter of a century over my contemporaries.
the most obvious feature of the course of instruction that i have partly retraced is the great effort to give during the years of childhood an amount of knowledge in what are considered the higher branches of education knowledge that is seldom acquired until the age of manhood, if then. the result of the experiment is to show how easily this can be done, and shines a strong light on the wretched waste of the precious years that are spent in acquiring the modicum of latin and greek commonly taught to schoolboys; a waste that has led so many educational reformers to entertain the ill-judged proposal of discarding these languages altogether from general education. if by nature i had been extremely quick of apprehension, or had had a very accurate and retentive memory, or were of a remarkably active and energetic character, the trial would not be conclusive; but in all these natural gifts i am below rather than above par what i could do could assuredly be done by any boy or girl of average capacity and healthy physical constitution. if i have accomplished anything in my life i owe it, among other fortunate circumstances, to the fact that because of the early training my father gave me i started, i may fairly say, with an advantage of a quarter of a century over my contemporaries.

there was one cardinal point in this training, of which i have already given some indication, and which, more than anything else, was the cause of whatever good it effected. most boys or youths who have had much knowledge drilled into them, have their mental capacities not strengthened, but overlaid by it. they are crammed with mere facts, and with the opinions or phrases of other people, and these are accepted as a substitute for the power to form opinions of their own; and thus the sons of eminent fathers, who have spared no pains in their education, so often grow up mere parroters of what they have learnt, incapable of using their minds except in the furrows traced for them. mine, however, was not an education of cram. my father never permitted anything which i learnt to degenerate into a mere exercise of memory. he strove to make the understanding not only go along with every step of the teaching, but, if possible, precede it. anything which could be found out by thinking i never was told, until i had exhausted my efforts to find it out for myself. as far as i can trust my remembrance, i acquitted myself very lamely in this department; my recollection of such matters is almost wholly of failures, hardly ever of success. it is true the failures were often in things in which success, in so early a stage of my progress, was almost impossible. i remember at some time in my thirteenth year, on my happening to use the word idea, he asked me what an idea was; and expressed some displeasure at my ineffectual efforts to define the word: i recollect also his indignation at my using the common expression that something was true in theory but required correction in practice; and how, after making me vainly strive to define the word theory, he explained its meaning, and showed the fallacy of the vulgar form of speech which i had used; leaving me fully persuaded that in being unable to give a correct definition of theory, and in speaking of it as something which might be at variance with practice, i had shown unparalleled ignorance. in this he seems, and perhaps was, very unreasonable; but i think, only in being angry at my failure. a pupil from whom nothing is ever demanded which he cannot do, never does all he can.
whatever good this training achieved was due to something of which i have already given some indication. most boys or youths who have had much knowledge drilled into them have their mental capacities not strengthened but over-laid by it. they are crammed with mere facts and with the opinions or phrases of other people, and these are accepted as a substitute for the power to form opinions of their own: and thus the sons of eminent fathers who have spared no pains in their education so often grow up mere parroters of what they have learned, incapable of using their minds except along the grooves prepared for them. mine was not an education of cram. my father never permitted anything that i learned to degenerate into a mere exercise of memory. he tried to make the understanding not only go along with every step of the teaching but if possible to precede it. if something could be found out by thinking, i never was told it until i had exhausted my efforts to find it out for myself. as far as i can trust my memory i acquitted myself very lamely in this; my recollection of such matters is almost wholly of failures, hardly ever of success. the failures were indeed often in things in which success was almost impossible at that early stage in my progress. at some time in my thirteenth year i happened to use the word idea; and he asked me what an idea was, and expressed some displeasure at my ineffectual efforts to define the word. i remember also his indignation at my using the common expression that something was true in theory but required correction in practice; and how after making me vainly try to define the word theory he explained its meaning and showed the fallacy of the vulgar form of speech i had used; leaving me fully convinced that i had shown unparalleled ignorance in being unable define theory correctly while speaking of theory as something that might be at variance with practice. in this he seems very unreasonable; i think that perhaps he was, but only in being angry at my failure. a pupil from whom nothing is ever demanded that he cannot do never does all he can.

one of the evils most liable to attend on any sort of early proficiency, and which often fatally blights its promise, my father most anxiously guarded against. this was self-conceit. he kept me, with extreme vigilance, out of the way of hearing myself praised, or of being led to make self-flattering comparisons between myself and others. from his own intercourse with me i could derive none but a very humble opinion of myself; and the standard of comparison he always held up to me, was not what other people did, but what a man could and ought to do. he completely succeeded in preserving me from the sort of influences he so much dreaded. i was not at all aware that my attainments were anything unusual at my age. if i accidentally had my attention drawn to the fact that some other boy knew less than myself which happened less often than might be imagined i concluded, not that i knew much, but that he, for some reason or other, knew little, or that his knowledge was of a different kind from mine. my state of mind was not humility, but neither was it arrogance. i never thought of saying to myself, i am, or i can do, so and so. i neither estimated myself highly nor lowly: i did not estimate myself at all. if i thought anything about myself, it was that i was rather backward in my studies, since i always found myself so, in comparison with what my father expected from me. i assert this with confidence, though it was not the impression of various persons who saw me in my childhood. they, as i have since found, thought me greatly and disagreeably self-conceited; probably because i was disputatious, and did not scruple to give direct contradictions to things which i heard said. i suppose i acquired this bad habit from having been encouraged in an unusual degree to talk on matters beyond my age, and with grown persons, while i never had inculcated on me the usual respect for them. my father did not correct this ill-breeding and impertinence, probably from not being aware of it, for i was always too much in awe of him to be otherwise than extremely subdued and quiet in his presence. yet with all this i had no notion of any superiority in myself; and well was it for me that i had not. i remember the very place in hyde park where, in my fourteenth year, on the eve of leaving my father's house for a long absence, he told me that i should find, as i got acquainted with new people, that i had been taught many things which youths of my age did not commonly know; and that many persons would be disposed to talk to me of this, and to compliment me upon it. what other things he said on this topic i remember very imperfectly; but he wound up by saying, that whatever i knew more than others, could not be ascribed to any merit in me, but to the very unusual advantage which had fallen to my lot, of having a father who was able to teach me, and willing to give the necessary trouble and time; that it was no matter of praise to me, if i knew more than those who had not had a similar advantage, but the deepest disgrace to me if i did not. i have a distinct remembrance, that the suggestion thus for the first time made to me, that i knew more than other youths who were considered well educated, was to me a piece of information, to which, as to all other things which my father told me, i gave implicit credence, but which did not at all impress me as a personal matter. i felt no disposition to glorify myself upon the circumstance that there were other persons who did not know what i knew; nor had i ever flattered myself that my acquirements, whatever they might be, were any merit of mine: but, now when my attention was called to the subject, i felt that what my father had said respecting my peculiar advantages was exactly the truth and common sense of the matter, and it fixed my opinion and feeling from that time forward.
my father anxiously guarded against one of the evils most likely to accompany any sort of early proficiency, an evil that often fatally blights its promise. this was self-conceit. he vigilantly kept me out of the way of hearing myself praised, or of being led to make self-flattering comparisons between myself and others. from his own conversations with me i could derive only a very humble opinion of myself; and the standard of comparison he always held up to me was not what other people did but what a man could and ought to do. he completely succeeded in preserving me from the sort of influences he so much dreaded. i was not at all aware that my attainments were anything unusual at my age. if i accidentally had my attention drawn to the fact that some other boy knew less than i did which happened less often than might be imagined i concluded not that i knew much but that he for some reason knew little, or that his knowledge was of a different kind from mine. my state of mind was not humility, but neither was it arrogance. i never thought of saying to myself i am such and such or i can do so and so. i did not estimate myself highly or lowly; i did not estimate myself at all. if i thought anything about myself it was that i was rather backward in my studies, since i always found myself to be so in comparison with what my father expected from me. i say this with confidence, though it was not the impression of various persons who saw me in my childhood. they, as i have since found, thought me greatly and disagreeably self-conceited; probably because i was argumentative and did not hesitate to flatly contradict things i heard said. i suppose i acquired this bad habit from having been greatly encouraged to talk with grown persons on matters beyond my age, and never having inculcated in me the usual respect for them. my father did not correct this ill-breeding and impertinence, probably from not being aware of it, for i was always too much in awe of him to be otherwise than extremely subdued and quiet in his presence. yet with all this i had no notion of any superiority in myself; and it was just as well for me that i had not. i remember the very place in hyde park where in my fourteenth year, on the eve of leaving my father's house for a long absence, he told me that i would find that i had been taught many things that youths of my age did not commonly know; and that many persons would talk to me about this and compliment me on it. i do not well remember what other things he said about this, but he wound up by saying that whatever i knew more than others could not be ascribed to any merit in me, but to my unusual advantage of having a father who was able to teach me, and willing to give the necessary trouble and time; that it was no matter of praise to me if i knew more than those who had not had a similar advantage, but the deepest disgrace to me if i did not. i distinctly remember that the information (learned on that occasion) that i knew more than other youths who were considered well educated did not at all impress me as a personal matter. i felt no disposition to glorify myself on the fact that there were other persons who did not know what i knew; nor had i ever flattered myself that my acquirements, whatever they might be, were any merit of mine. now that my attention was called to the subject, i felt that what my father had said about my special advantages was exactly the truth and common sense of the matter, and it fixed my opinion and feeling from that time forward.

chapter ii
my solitary childhood

moral influences in early youth. my fathers character and opinions
in a subsequent stage of boyhood when these exercises had ceased to be compulsory, like most youthful writers i wrote tragedies; under the inspiration not so much of shakespeare as of joanna baillie, whose constantine paleologus in particular appeared to me one of the most glorious human compositions. i still think it one of the best dramas of the last two centuries. part 2: moral influences in early youth. my father's character and opinions

in my education, as in that of everyone, the moral influences, which are so much more important than all others, are also the most complicated, and the most difficult to specify with any approach to completeness. without attempting the hopeless task of detailing the circumstances by which, in this respect, my early character may have been shaped, i shall confine myself to a few leading points, which form an indispensable part of any true account of my education.
in my education, as in everyone's, the moral influences that are so much more important than all others are also the most complicated and the most difficult to specify with any approach to completeness. without attempting the hopeless task of detailing the circumstances by which my early character may have been shaped in this respect, i shall confine myself to a few leading points that form an indispensable part of any true account of my education.

i was brought up from the first without any religious belief, in the ordinary acceptation of the term. my father, educated in the creed of scotch presbyterianism, had by his own studies and reflections been early led to reject not only the belief in revelation, but the foundations of what is commonly called natural religion. i have heard him say, that the turning point of his mind on the subject was reading butler's analogy. that work, of which he always continued to speak with respect, kept him, as he said, for some considerable time, a believer in the divine authority of christianity; by proving to him that whatever are the difficulties in believing that the old and new testaments proceed from, or record the acts of, a perfectly wise and good being, the same and still greater difficulties stand in the way of the belief, that a being of such a character can have been the maker of the universe. he considered butler's argument as conclusive against the only opponents for whom it was intended. those who admit an omnipotent as well as perfectly just and benevolent maker and ruler of such a world as this, can say little against christianity but what can, with at least equal force, be retorted against themselves. finding, therefore, no halting place in deism, he remained in a state of perplexity, until, doubtless after many struggles, he yielded to the conviction, that concerning the origin of things nothing whatever can be known. this is the only correct statement of his opinion; for dogmatic atheism he looked upon as absurd; as most of those, whom the world has considered atheists, have always done. these particulars are important, because they show that my father's rejection of all that is called religious belief, was not, as many might suppose, primarily a matter of logic and evidence: the grounds of it were moral, still more than intellectual. he found it impossible to believe that a world so full of evil was the work of an author combining infinite power with perfect goodness and righteousness. his intellect spurned the subtleties by which men attempt to blind themselves to this open contradiction. the sabaean, or manichaean theory of a good and an evil principle, struggling against each other for the government of the universe, he would not have equally condemned; and i have heard him express surprise, that no one revived it in our time. he would have regarded it as a mere hypothesis; but he would have ascribed to it no depraving influence. as it was, his aversion to religion, in the sense usually attached to the term, was of the same kind with that of lucretius: he regarded it with the feelings due not to a mere mental delusion, but to a great moral evil. he looked upon it as the greatest enemy of morality: first, by setting up fictitious excellences belief in creeds, devotional feelings, and ceremonies, not connected with the good of human-kind and causing these to be accepted as substitutes for genuine virtues: but above all, by radically vitiating the standard of morals; making it consist in doing the will of a being, on whom it lavishes indeed all the phrases of adulation, but whom in sober truth it depicts as eminently hateful. i have a hundred times heard him say that all ages and nations have represented their gods as wicked, in a constantly increasing progression; that mankind have gone on adding trait after trait till they reached the most perfect conception of wickedness which the human mind can devise, and have called this god, and prostrated themselves before it. this ne plus ultra of wickedness he considered to be embodied in what is commonly presented to mankind as the creed of christianity. think (he used to say) of a being who would make a hell who would create the human race with the infallible foreknowledge, and therefore with the intention, that the great majority of them were to be consigned to horrible and everlasting torment. the time, i believe, is drawing near when this dreadful conception of an object of worship will be no longer identified with christianity; and when all persons, with any sense of moral good and evil, will look upon it with the same indignation with which my father regarded it. my father was as well aware as anyone that christians do not, in general, undergo the demoralizing consequences which seem inherent in such a creed, in the manner or to the extent which might have been expected from it. the same slovenliness of thought, and subjection of the reason to fears, wishes, and affections, which enable them to accept a theory involving a contradiction in terms, prevents them from perceiving the logical consequences of the theory. such is the facility with which mankind believe at one and the same time things inconsistent with one another, and so few are those who draw from what they receive as truths, any consequences but those recommended to them by their feelings, that multitudes have held the undoubting belief in an omnipotent author of hell, and have nevertheless identified that being with the best conception they were able to form of perfect goodness. their worship was not paid to the demon which such a being as they imagined would really be, but to their own ideal of excellence. the evil is, that such a belief keeps the ideal wretchedly low; and opposes the most obstinate resistance to all thought which has a tendency to raise it higher. believers shrink from every train of ideas which would lead the mind to a clear conception and an elevated standard of excellence, because they feel (even when they do not distinctly see) that such a standard would conflict with many of the dispensations of nature, and with much of what they are accustomed to consider as the christian creed. and thus morality continues a matter of blind tradition, with no consistent principle, nor even any consistent feeling, to guide it.
i was brought up from the first without any religious belief, in the ordinary meaning of that phrase. my father, educated in the creed of scotch presbyterianism, had by his own studies and reflections been early led to reject not only the belief in revelation but the foundations of what is commonly called natural religion. i have heard him say that the turning point of his mind on the subject was reading butler's the analogy of religion, natural and revealed, to the constitution and course of nature. that work, which he always spoke of with respect, kept him (he said) for some considerable time a believer in the divine authority of christianity. it did this by proving to him that whatever are the difficulties in believing that the old and new testaments proceed from, or record the acts of, a perfectly wise and good being, the same and still greater difficulties stand in the way of the belief that a being of such a character can have been the maker of the universe. he considered butler's argument as conclusive against the only opponents for whom it was intended. those who admit an omnipotent as well as perfectly just and benevolent maker and ruler of such a world as this, namely deists, can say little against christianity except what can with at least equal force be retorted against themselves. finding therefore no halting place in deism, he remained in a state of perplexity until (doubtless after many struggles) he yielded to the conviction that nothing whatever can be known concerning the origin of things. this is the only correct statement of his opinion; for he looked on dogmatic atheism as absurd; as most of those whom the world has considered atheists have always done. these details are important because they show that my father's rejection of all that is called religious belief was not, as many might suppose, primarily a matter of logic and evidence; the grounds of it were moral more than intellectual. he found it impossible to believe that a world so full of evil was the work of an author combining infinite power with perfect goodness and righteousness. his intellect spurned the subtleties by which men attempt to blind themselves to this open contradiction. he would not have equally condemned the manichaean theory of good and evil forces struggling against each other for the government of the universe, and i have heard him express surprise that no one revived it in our time. he would have regarded it as a mere hypothesis, but would not have ascribed to it any depraving influence. as it was, his aversion to religion (in the usual sense of the word) was like that of lucretius: he regarded it with the feelings appropriate not to a mere mental delusion but to a great moral evil. he looked on it as the greatest enemy of morality by setting up factitious excellencies, belief in creeds, devotional feelings, and ceremonies not connected with the good of human kind; by causing these to be accepted as substitutes for genuine virtues; and and above all by radically spoiling the standard of morals, making it consist in doing the will of a being on whom it lavishes all the phrases of adulation but whom in sober truth it depicts as utterly dreadful. i have a hundred times heard him say that all ages and nations have represented their gods as wicked in a constantly increasing progression, that mankind have gone on adding trait after trait till they reached the most perfect conception of wickedness that the human mind can devise, and have called this god and prostrated themselves before it. this ne plus ultra of wickedness he considered to be embodied in what is commonly presented to mankind as the creed of christianity. think (he used to say) of a being who would make a hell who would create the human race with the infallible foreknowledge (and therefore with the intention) that the great majority of them were to be consigned to horrible and everlasting torment. the time, i believe, is drawing near when this dreadful conception of an object of worship will be no longer identified with christianity, and when everyone with any sense of moral good and evil will look on it with the same indignation as my father did. he knew as well as anyone that christians do not in general undergo, in the manner or to the extent that might have been expected, the demoralising consequences that seem inherent in such a creed. the same slovenliness of thought and subjection of reason to fears, wishes, and affections that enable them to accept a theory involving a contradiction in terms also prevent them from perceiving the logical consequences of the theory. so easy it is for mankind to believe at one and the same time things inconsistent with one another, and so few are those who draw from what they receive as truths any consequences but those recommended to them by their feelings, that multitudes have held the undoubting belief in an omnipotent author of hell, and have nevertheless identified that being with the best conception they could form of perfect goodness. their worship was addressed not to the demon that such a being as they imagined would really be, but to their own idea of excellence. the evil is that such a belief keeps the ideal wretchedly low, and creates the most obstinate resistance to any thought that has a tendency to raise it higher. believers shrink from every line of thought that would lead the mind to a clear conception and an elevated standard of excellence, because they feel (even when they do not clearly see) that such a standard would conflict with many of the dispensations of nature and with much of what they are accustomed to consider as the christian creed. thus morality continues to be a matter of blind tradition, with no consistent principle or even any consistent feeling to guide it.

it would have been wholly inconsistent with my father's ideas of duty, to allow me to acquire impressions contrary to his convictions and feelings respecting religion: and he impressed upon me from the first, that the manner in which the world came into existence was a subject on which nothing was known: that the question, who made me? cannot be answered, because we have no experience or authentic information from which to answer it; and that any answer only throws the difficulty a step further back, since the question immediately presents itself, who made god? he, at the same time, took care that i should be acquainted with what had been thought by mankind on these impenetrable problems. i have mentioned at how early an age he made me a reader of ecclesiastical history; and he taught me to take the strongest interest in the reformation, as the great and decisive contest against priestly tyranny for liberty of thought.
myself and religion it would have been wholly inconsistent with my father's ideas of duty to allow me to acquire impressions regarding religion that were contrary to his own convictions and feelings; and he impressed upon me from the first that how the world came into existence was a subject on which nothing was known; that the question who made me? cannot be answered because we have no experience or authentic information on which to base an answer, and that any answer only throws the difficulty a step further back, since the question who made god? immediately arises. at the same time he took care that i should be acquainted with what had been thought by mankind on these impenetrable problems. i have mentioned that at an early age he made me read ecclesiastical history, and he taught me to take the strongest interest in the reformation, as the great and decisive contest against priestly tyranny for liberty of thought.

i am thus one of the very few examples, in this country, of one who has not thrown off religious belief, but never had it: i grew up in a negative state with regard to it. i looked upon the modern exactly as i did upon the ancient religion, as something which in no way concerned me. it did not seem to me more strange that english people should believe what i did not, than that the men i read of in herodotus should have done so. history had made the variety of opinions among mankind a fact familiar to me, and this was but a prolongation of that fact. this point in my early education had, however, incidentally one bad consequence deserving notice. in giving me an opinion contrary to that of the world, my father thought it necessary to give it as one which could not prudently be avowed to the world. this lesson of keeping my thoughts to myself, at that early age, was attended with some moral disadvantages; though my limited intercourse with strangers, especially such as were likely to speak to me on religion, prevented me from being placed in the alternative of avowal or hypocrisy. i remember two occasions in my boyhood, on which i felt myself in this alternative, and in both cases i avowed my disbelief and defended it. my opponents were boys, considerably older than myself: one of them i certainly staggered at the time, but the subject was never renewed between us: the other who was surprised and somewhat shocked, did his best to convince me for some time, without effect.
i am thus one of the very few examples in this country of one who has not thrown off religious belief but never had it; i grew up in a negative state with regard to it. i looked upon the modern religion exactly as i did on the ancient ones, as something that in no way concerned me. it did not seem to me more strange that english people should believe what i did not than that the men i read of in herodotus should have done so. history had made the variety of opinions among mankind a fact familiar to me, and this was merely a prolongation of that fact. this aspect of my early education did however have one bad consequence that i ought to mention. in giving me an opinion contrary to that of the world, my father thought it necessary to give it as something that could not prudently be avowed to the world. this early lesson of keeping my thoughts to myself brought some moral disadvantages, though my limited contact with strangers especially ones who were likely to speak to me about religion prevented me from being confronted by the choice between avowal and hypocrisy. i remember two boyhood occasions when i felt myself faced with this choice, and each time i avowed my disbelief and defended it. my opponents were boys considerably older than myself; one of them i certainly staggered at the time, but the subject was never renewed between us; the other did his best to convince me for some time, without effect.

the great advance in liberty of discussion, which is one of the most important differences between the present time and that of my childhood, has greatly altered the moralities of this question; and i think that few men of my father's intellect and public spirit, holding with such intensity of moral conviction as he did, unpopular opinions on religion, or on any other of the great subjects of thought, would now either practise or inculcate the withholding of them from the world, unless in the cases, becoming fewer every day, in which frankness on these subjects would either risk the loss of means of subsistence, or would amount to exclusion from some sphere of usefulness peculiarly suitable to the capacities of the individual. on religion in particular the time appears to me to have come when it is the duty of all who, being qualified in point of knowledge, have on mature consideration satisfied themselves that the current opinions are not only false but hurtful, to make their dissent known; at least, if they are among those whose station or reputation gives their opinion a chance of being attended to. such an avowal would put an end, at once and for ever, to the vulgar prejudice, that what is called, very improperly, unbelief, is connected with any bad qualities either of mind or heart. the world would be astonished if it knew how great a proportion of its brightest ornaments of those most distinguished even in popular estimation for wisdom and virtue are complete sceptics in religion; many of them refraining from avowal, less from personal considerations than from a conscientious, though now in my opinion a most mistaken, apprehension, lest by speaking out what would tend to weaken existing beliefs, and by consequence (as they suppose) existing restraints, they should do harm instead of good.
the great advance in liberty of discussion that is one of the most important differences between the present time and that of my childhood has greatly altered the moralities of this question; and i think that few men of my father's intellect and public spirit, holding with such intensity of moral conviction as he did unpopular opinions on religion or on any other of the great subjects of thought, would now practise or recommend withholding them from the world; except in cases (becoming fewer every day) where frankness on these subjects would risk the loss of livelihood or amount to exclusion from some sphere of usefulness especially suitable to the person's capacities. on religion in particular the time appears to me to have come when all those who are qualified in point of knowledge, and have on mature consideration concluded that the current opinions are not only false but harmful, have a duty to make their dissent known; at least if they are among those whose standing or reputation gives their opinion a chance of being attended to. such an avowal would finally put an end to the vulgar prejudice that what is very improperly called unbelief is connected with any bad qualities of mind or heart. the world would be astonished if it knew how great a proportion of its brightest ornaments of those most distinguished even in popular estimation for wisdom and virtue are complete sceptics in religion. many of them refrain from openly avowing this not so much from personal considerations as from a conscientious fear (now, i think, a most mistaken one) that they would do harm instead of good by saying things that would tend to weaken existing beliefs and thus (they think) weaken existing restraints.

of unbelievers (so called) as well as of believers, there are many species, including almost every variety of moral type. but the best among them, as no one who has had opportunities of really knowing them will hesitate to affirm, are more genuinely religious, in the best sense of the word religion, than those who exclusively arrogate to themselves the title. the liberality of the age, or in other words the weakening of the obstinate prejudice which makes men unable to see what is before their eyes because it is contrary to their expectations, has caused it be very commonly admitted that a deist may be truly religious: but if religion stands for any graces of character and not for mere dogma, the assertion may equally be made of many whose belief is far short of deism. though they may think the proof incomplete that the universe is a work of design, and though they assuredly disbelieve that it can have an author and governor who is absolute in power as well as perfect in goodness, they have that which constitutes the principal worth of all religions whatever, an ideal conception of a perfect being, to which they habitually refer as the guide of their conscience; and this ideal of good is usually far nearer to perfection than the objective deity of those who think themselves obliged to find absolute goodness in the author of a world so crowded with suffering and so deformed by injustice as ours.
of unbelievers (so-called) as well as of believers there are many species, including almost every variety of moral type. but the best among them, as anyone who has had (as believers rarely do) opportunities of really knowing them will agree, are more genuinely religious in the best sense of that word than those who claim the title as exclusively belonging to them. the liberality of the age i.e. the weakening of the obstinate prejudice that makes men unable to see what is before their eyes because it is contrary to their expectations has caused it to be very commonly admitted that a deist may be truly religious; but if religion stands for any graces of character and not for mere dogma, the assertion may equally be made of many whose belief is far short of deism. though they may think the proof incomplete that the universe is a work of design, and though they assuredly disbelieve that it can have an author and governor who is absolute in power as well as perfect in goodness, they have something that constitutes the principal worth of all religions whatever, namely an ideal conception of a perfect being, to which they habitually refer as the guide of their conscience; and this ideal of good is usually far nearer to perfection than the fictional deity of those who think themselves obliged to find absolute goodness in the author of a world as crowded with suffering and as deformed by injustice as ours is.

my father's moral convictions, wholly dissevered from religion, were very much of the character of those of the greek philosophers; and were delivered with the force and decision which characterized all that came from him. even at the very early age at which i read with him the memorabilia of xenophon, i imbibed from that work and from his comments a deep respect for the character of socrates; who stood in my mind as a model of ideal excellence: and i well remember how my father at that time impressed upon me the lesson of the choice of hercules. at a somewhat later period the lofty moral standard exhibited in the writings of plato operated upon me with great force. my father's moral inculcations were at all times mainly those of the socratici viri; justice, temperance (to which he gave a very extended application), veracity, perseverance, readiness to encounter pain and especially labour; regard for the public good; estimation of persons according to their merits, and of things according to their intrinsic usefulness; a life of exertion in contradiction to one of self-indulgent ease and sloth. these and other moralities he conveyed in brief sentences, uttered as occasion arose, of grave exhortation, or stern reprobation and contempt.
my father and the greeks my father's moral convictions, wholly separated from religion, were very like those of the greek philosophers, and were delivered with the force and decision that characterised all that came from him. even at the very early age at which i read with him the memorabilia of xenophon, i imbibed from that work and from his comments a deep respect for the character of socrates, who stood in my mind as a model of ideal excellence; and i well remember how my father at that time impressed upon me the lesson of the choice of hercules between virtue and vice. at a somewhat later period the lofty moral standard exhibited in the writings of plato operated on me with great force. my father's moral inculcations were at all times mainly those of socrates followers, namely justice, temperance (to which he gave a very extended application), veracity, perseverance, readiness to encounter pain and especially labour; regard for the public good; estimation of persons according to their merits, and of things according to their intrinsic usefulness; a life of exertion in contradiction to one of self-indulgent sloth. these and other moralities he conveyed in brief sentences, uttered as grave exhortation or stern reprobation and contempt, as occasion arose.

but though direct moral teaching does much, indirect does more; and the effect my father produced on my character, did not depend solely on what he said or did with that direct object, but also, and still more, on what manner of man he was.
but though direct moral teaching does much, indirect does more; and the effect my father produced on my character depended less on what he said or did with that direct purpose than on what manner of man he was.

in his views of life he partook of the character of the stoic, the epicurean, and the cynic, not in the modern but the ancient sense of the word. in his personal qualities the stoic predominated. his standard of morals was epicurean, inasmuch as it was utilitarian, taking as the exclusive test of right and wrong, the tendency of actions to produce pleasure or pain. but he had (and this was the cynic element) scarcely any belief in pleasure; at least in his later years, of which alone, on this point, i can speak confidently. he was not insensible to pleasures; but he deemed very few of them worth the price which, at least in the present state of society, must be paid for them. the greater number of miscarriages in life he considered to be attributable to the overvaluing of pleasures. accordingly, temperance, in the large sense intended by the greek philosophers stopping short at the point of moderation in all indulgences was with him, as with them, almost the central point of educational precept. his inculcations of this virtue fill a large place in my childish remembrances. he thought human life a poor thing at best, after the freshness of youth and of unsatisfied curiosity had gone by. this was a topic on which he did not often speak, especially, it may be supposed, in the presence of young persons: but when he did, it was with an air of settled and profound conviction. he would sometimes say that if life were made what it might be, by good government and good education, it would be worth having: but he never spoke with anything like enthusiasm even of that possibility. he never varied in rating intellectual enjoyments above all others, even in value as pleasures, independently of their ulterior benefits. the pleasures of the benevolent affections he placed high in the scale; and used to say, that he had never known a happy old man, except those who were able to live over again in the pleasures of the young. for passionate emotions of all sorts, and for everything which bas been said or written in exaltation of them, he professed the greatest contempt. he regarded them as a form of madness. the intense was with him a bye-word of scornful disapprobation. he regarded as an aberration of the moral standard of modern times, compared with that of the ancients, the great stress laid upon feeling. feelings, as such, he considered to be no proper subjects of praise or blame. right and wrong, good and bad, he regarded as qualities solely of conduct of acts and omissions; there being no feeling which may not lead, and does not frequently lead, either to good or to bad actions: conscience itself, the very desire to act right, often leading people to act wrong. consistently carrying out the doctrine that the object of praise and blame should be the discouragement of wrong conduct and the encouragement of right, he refused to let his praise or blame be influenced by the motive of the agent. he blamed as severely what he thought a bad action, when the motive was a feeling of duty, as if the agents had been consciously evil doers. he would not have accepted as a plea in mitigation for inquisitors, that they sincerely believed burning heretics to be an obligation of conscience. but though he did not allow honesty of purpose to soften his disapprobation of actions, it had its full effect on his estimation of characters. no one prized conscientiousness and rectitude of intention more highly, or was more incapable of valuing any person in whom he did not feel assurance of it. but he disliked people quite as much for any other deficiency, provided he thought it equally likely to make them act ill. he disliked, for instance, a fanatic in any bad cause, as much as or more than one who adopted the same cause from self-interest, because he thought him even more likely to be practically mischievous. and thus, his aversion to many intellectual errors, or what he regarded as such, partook, in a certain sense, of the character of a moral feeling. all this is merely saying that he, in a degree once common, but now very unusual, threw his feelings into his opinions; which truly it is difficult to understand how anyone who possesses much of both, can fail to do. none but those who do not care about opinions will confound this with intolerance. those who, having opinions which they hold to be immensely important, and their contraries to be prodigiously hurtful, have any deep regard for the general good, will necessarily dislike, as a class and in the abstract, those who think wrong what they think right, and right what they think wrong: though they need not therefore be, nor was my father, insensible to good qualities in an opponent, nor governed in their estimation of individuals by one general presumption, instead of by the whole of their character. i grant that an earnest person, being no more infallible than other men, is liable to dislike people on account of opinions which do not merit dislike; but if he neither himself does them any ill office, nor connives at its being donc by others, he is not intolerant: and the forbearance which flows from a conscientious sense of the importance to mankind of the equal freedom of all opinions, is the only tolerance which is commendable, or, to the highest moral order of minds, possible.
in his views of life he partook of the character of the stoic, the epicurean, and not in the modern but the ancient sense of the word the cynic. in his personal qualities the stoic predominated. his standard of morals was epicurean in that it was utilitarian, taking as the exclusive test of right and wrong the tendency of actions to produce pleasure or pain. but he had (and this was the cynic element) scarcely any belief in pleasure at least in his later years, the only ones about which i can speak confidently on this topic. he was not insensible to pleasures, but he regarded few of them as worth the price that must be paid for them, at least in the present state of society. most things that go wrong in life he considered to be due to the overvaluing of pleasures. accordingly, temperance in the broad sense intended by the greek philosophers, stretching out to moderation in all indulgences was for him almost the central point of educational precept, as it was for them. his inculcations of this virtue fill a large place in my memories of childhood. he thought that human life, after the freshness of youth and of unsatisfied curiosity had gone by, is a poor thing at best. he did not often speak about this, especially (it may be supposed) in the presence of young persons; but when he did, it was with an air of settled and profound conviction. he would sometimes say that life would be worth having if good government and good education made it what it could be; but he never spoke of that possibility with anything like enthusiasm. he always rated intellectual enjoyments above all others even in their value as pleasures independently of their ulterior benefits. the pleasures of the benevolent affections he placed high in the scale; and he used to say that he had never known a happy old man except those who were able to re-live the pleasures of the young.

it will be admitted, that a man of the opinions, and the character, above described, was likely to leave a strong moral impression on any mind principally formed by him, and that his moral teaching was not likely to err on the side of laxity or indulgence. the element which was chiefly deficient in his moral relation to his children was that of tenderness. i do not believe that this deficiency lay in his own nature. i believe him to have had much more feeling than he habitually showed, and much greater capacities of feeling than were ever developed. he resembled most englishmen in being ashamed of the signs of feeling, and, by the absence of demonstration, starving the feelings themselves. if we consider further that he was in the trying position of sole teacher, and add to this that his temper was constitutionally irritable, it is impossible not to feel true pity for a father who did, and strove to do, so much for his children, who would have so valued their affection, yet who must have been constantly feeling that fear of him was drying it up at its source. this was no longer the case later in life, and with his younger children. they loved him tenderly: and if i cannot say so much of myself, i was always loyally devoted to him. as regards my own education, i hesitate to pronounce whether i was more a loser or gainer by his severity. it was not such as to prevent me from having a happy childhood. and i do not believe that boys can be induced to apply themselves with vigour, and what is so much more difficult perseverance, to dry and irksome studies, by the sole force of persuasion and soft words. much must be done, and much must be learnt, by children, for which rigid discipline, and known liability to punishment, are indispensable as means. it is, no doubt, a very laudable effort, in modern teaching, to render as much as possible of what the young are required to learn, easy and interesting to them. but when this principle is pushed to the length of not requiring them to learn anything but what has been made easy and interesting, one of the chief objects of education is sacrificed. i rejoice in the decline of the old brutal and tyrannical system of teaching, which, however, did succeed in enforcing habits of application; but the new, as it seems to me, is training up a race of men who will be incapable of doing anything which is disagreeable to them. i do not, then, believe that fear, as an element in education, can be dispensed with; but i am sure that it ought not to be the main element; and when it predominates so much as to preclude love and confidence on the part of the child to those who should be the unreservedly trusted advisers of after years, and perhaps to seal up the fountains of frank and spontaneous communicativeness in the child's nature, it is an evil for which a large abatement must be made from the benefits, moral and intellectual, which may flow from any other part of the education.
it will be admitted that a man with the opinions and the character i have described my father as having was likely to leave a strong moral impression on any mind principally formed by him, and that his moral teaching was not likely to err on the side of laxity or indulgence! the element that was chiefly lacking in his moral relation with his children was tenderness. i do not believe that this deficiency lay in his own nature. i believe him to have had much more feeling than he habitually showed, and much greater capacities of feeling than were ever developed. he resembled most englishmen in being ashamed of the signs of feeling, and starving the feelings themselves by not demonstrating them. given that he was in the demanding position of sole teacher, and that his temperament was constitutionally irritable, one must feel true pity for a father who did and worked to do so much for his children, who would have so valued their affection, yet who must have constantly felt that fear of him was drying it up at its source. this was no longer the case later in life, and with his younger children. they loved him tenderly, and if i cannot say so much of myself i was always loyally devoted to him. as regards my own education, i hesitate to pronounce whether i was more a loser or gainer by his severity. it did not prevent me from having a happy childhood. and i do not believe that boys can be induced to apply themselves with vigour and (much more difficult) perseverance to dry and irksome studies solely by persuasion and soft words. there is much that children must do, and much that they must learn, that they will not do and learn without rigid discipline and known liability to punishment. no doubt it is a very laudable effort in modern teaching to make easy and interesting to the young as much as possible of what they are required to learn. but when this principle is pushed to the length of not requiring them to learn anything but what has been made easy and interesting, one of the chief aims of education is sacrificed. i rejoice in the decline of the old brutal and tyrannical system of teaching, though it did succeed in enforcing habits of application; but the new system seems to me to be training a race of men who will be incapable of doing anything that is disagreeable to them. so i do not believe that fear can be dispensed with as an element in education; but i am sure that it ought not to be the main element; and when it predominates so much as to preclude love and confidence on the part of the child to those who should be the unreservedly trusted advisers in later years, and perhaps to seal up the fountains of frank and spontaneous communicativeness in the child's nature, it is an evil that constitutes a large deduction from the moral and intellectual benefits that may flow from any other part of the education.

during this first period of my life, the habitual frequenters of my father's house were limited to a very few persons, most of them little known to the world, but whom personal worth, and more or less of congeniality with at least his political opinions (not so frequently to be met with then as since), inclined him to cultivate; and his conversations with them i listened to with interest and instruction. my being an habitual inmate of my father's study made me acquainted with the dearest of his friends, david ricardo, who by his benevolent countenance, and kindliness of manner, was very attractive to young persons, and who, after i became a student of political economy, invited me to his house and to walk with him in order to converse on the subject. i was a more frequent visitor (from about 1817 or 1818) to mr. hume, who, born in the same part of scotland as my father, and having been, i rather think, a younger schoolfellow or college companion of his, had on returning from india renewed their youthful acquaintance, and who coming, like many others, greatly under the influence of my father's intellect and energy of character was induced partly by that influence to go into parliament, and there adopt the line of conduct which has given him an honourable place in the history of his country. of mr. bentham i saw much more, owing to the close intimacy which existed between him and my father. i do not know how soon after my father's first arrival in england they became acquainted. but my father was the earliest englishman of any great mark, who thoroughly understood, and in the main adopted, bentham's general views of ethics, government and law: and this was a natural foundation for sympathy between them, and made them familiar companions in a period of bentham's life during which he admitted much fewer visitors than was the case subsequently. at this time mr. bentham passed some part of every year at barrow green house, in a beautiful part of the surrey hills, a few miles from godstone, and there i each summer accompanied my father in a long visit. in 1813 mr. bentham, my father, and i made an excursion, which included oxford, bath and bristol, exeter, plymouth, and portsmouth. in this journey i saw many things which were instructive to me, and acquired my first taste for natural scenery, in the elementary form of fondness for a view. in the succeeding winter we moved into a house very near mr. bentham's, which my father rented from him, in queen square, westminster. from 1814 to 1817 mr. bentham lived during half of each year at ford abbey, in somersetshire (or rather in a part of devonshire surrounded by somersetshire), which intervals i had the advantage of passing at that place. this sojourn was, i think, an important circumstance in my education. nothing contributes more to nourish elevation of sentiments in a people, than the large and free character of their habitations. the middle-age architecture, the baronial hall, and the spacious and lofty rooms, of this fine old place, so unlike the mean and cramped externals of english middle-class life, gave the sentiment of a larger and freer existence, and were to me a sort of poetic cultivation, aided also by the character of the grounds in which the abbey stood; which were riant
during this first period of my life the habitual visitors to my father's house were limited to a very few persons, most of them little known to the world, but whom personal worth, and some congeniality with at least his political opinions (not so common then as since) inclined him to cultivate; and i listened with interest and instruction to his conversations with them. my being an habitual occupant of my father's study made me acquainted with the dearest of his friends, david ricardo, whose benevolent countenance and kindliness of manner made him very attractive to young persons, and who (after i became a student of political economy) invited me to his house and to walk with him in order to have conversations on that subject. i was a more frequent visitor (from about 1817 or 1818) to mr joseph hume. he was born in the same part of scotland as my father and was (i think) a younger schoolfellow or college companion of his; on returning from india he renewed their youthful acquaintance, and (like many others) came to be much influenced by my father's intellect and energy of character. that was a part of what induced him to go into parliament, and there adopt the line of conduct that has given him an honourable place in the history of his country. i saw much more of mr bentham, because of his close intimacy with my father. i do not know how soon after my father's first arrival in england they became acquainted. but my father was the earliest englishman of any great mark who thoroughly understood and mainly adopted bentham's general views of ethics, government and law; and this was a natural basis for sympathy between them, and made them familiar companions at a time in bentham's life when which he admitted far fewer visitors than he did subsequently. at this time mr bentham passed some part of every year at barrow green house, in a beautiful part of the surrey hills, where each summer i accompanied my father in a long visit. in 1813 i went with mr bentham and my father on an excursion that included oxford, bath and bristol, exeter, plymouth, and portsmouth. on this journey i saw many things that were instructive to me, and acquired my first taste for natural scenery in the elementary form of fondness for a view. in the succeeding winter we moved into a house very near mr bentham's, which my father rented from him, in queen square, westminster. from 1814 to 1817 mr bentham lived during half of each year at ford abbey in a part of devonshire surrounded by somersetshire, and i had the advantage of spending those times at that place. this was, i think, an important factor in my education. nothing contributes more to encourage elevation of sentiments in a people than the large and free character of their homes. this fine old place's medieval architecture, baronial hall, and spacious and lofty rooms so unlike the mean and cramped externals of english middle class life gave one the feeling of a larger and freer existence, and were to me a sort of poetic cultivation, aided also by the character of the grounds in which the abbey stood. these were cheerful, shady, and full of the sound of falling waters.

i owed another of the fortunate circumstances in my education, a year's residence in france, to mr. bentham's brother, general sir samuel bentham. i had seen sir samuel bentham and his family at their house near gosport in the course of the tour already mentioned (he being then superintendent of the dockyard at portsmouth), and during a stay of a few days which they made at ford abbey shortly after the peace, before going to live on the continent. in 1820 they invited me for a six months visit to them in the south of france, which their kindness ultimately prolonged to nearly a twelvemonth. sir samuel bentham, though of a character of mind different from that of his illustrious brother, was a man of very considerable attainments and general powers, with a decided genius for mechanical art. his wife, a daughter of the celebrated chemist, dr. fordyce, was a woman of strong will and decided character, much general knowledge, and great practical good sense of the edgeworth kind: she was the ruling spirit of the household, as she deserved, and was well qualified, to be. their family consisted of one son (the eminent botanist) and three daughters, the youngest about two years my senior. i am indebted to them for much and various instruction, and for an almost parental interest in my welfare. when i first joined them, in may, 1820, they occupied the chateau of pompignan (still belonging to a descendant of voltaire's enemy) on the heights overlooking the plain of the garonne between montauban and toulouse. i accompanied them in an excursion to the pyrenees, including a stay of some duration at bagneres de bigorre, a journey to pau, bayonne, and bagneres de luchon, and an ascent of the pic du midi de bigorre.
another fortunate factor in my education was a year's residence in france, which i owed to mr bentham's brother, general sir samuel bentham. i had seen him and his family at their house near gosport in the course of the tour already mentioned (he being then superintendent of the dockyard at portsmouth), and during a stay of a few days which they made at ford abbey shortly after the peace of 1815, before going to live on the continent. in 1820 they invited me for a six months visit to them in the south of france, which their kindness eventually prolonged to nearly a year. sir samuel bentham, though of a character of mind different from that of his illustrious brother, was a man of very considerable attainments and general powers, with a decided genius for mechanical art. his wife, a daughter of the celebrated chemist dr fordyce, was a woman of strong will and decided character, much general knowledge, and great practical good sense of the edgeworth kind,. she was the ruling spirit of the household, as she deserved to be and was well qualified to be. their family consisted of one son (the eminent botanist) and three daughters, the youngest about two years my senior. i am indebted to them for much and various instruction, and for an almost parental interest in my welfare. when i first joined them, in may 1820, they occupied the chateau of pompignan (still belonging to a descendant of voltaire's enemy jean-jacques lefranc, marquis de pompignan) on the heights overlooking the plain of the garonne between montauban and toulouse. i accompanied them in an excursion to the pyrenees, including a stay at bagneres de bigorre, a journey to pau, bayonne, and bagneres de luchon, and an ascent of the pic du midi de bigorre.

this first introduction to the highest order of mountain scenery made the deepest impression on me, and gave a colour to my tastes through life. in october we proceeded by the beautiful mountain route of castres and st. pons, from toulouse to montpellier, in which last neighbourhood sir samuel had just bought the estate of restincliere, near the foot of the singular mountain of st. loup. during this residence in france i acquired a familiar knowledge of the french language, and acquaintance with the ordinary french literature; i took lessons in various bodily exercises, in none of which, however, i made any proficiency; and at montpellier i attended the excellent winter courses of lectures at the faculte des sciences, those of m. anglada on chemistry, of m. provencal on zoology, and of a very accomplished representative of the eighteenth century metaphysics, m. gergonne, on logic, under the name of philosophy of the sciences. i also went through a course of the higher mathematics under the private tuition of m. lentheric, a professor at the lycee of montpellier. but the greatest, perhaps, of the many advantages which i owed to this episode in my education, was that of having breathed for a whole year, the free and genial atmosphere of continental life. this advantage was not the less real though i could not then estimate, nor even consciously feel it. having so little experience of english life, and the few people i knew being mostly such as had public objects, of a large and personally disinterested kind, at heart, i was ignorant of the low moral tone of what, in england, is called society; the habit of, not indeed professing, but taking for granted in every mode of implication, that conduct is of course always directed towards low and petty objects; the absence of high feelings which manifests itself by sneering depreciation of all demonstrations of them, and by general abstinence (except among a few of the stricter religionists) from professing any high principles of action at all, except in those preordained cases in which such profession is put on as part of the costume and formalities of the occasion. i could not then know or estimate the difference between this manner of existence, and that of a people like the french, whose faults, if equally real, are at all events different; among whom sentiments, which by comparison at least may be called elevated, are the current coin of human intercourse, both in books and in private life; and though often evaporating in profession, are yet kept alive in the nation at large by constant exercise, and stimulated by sympathy, so as to form a living and active part of the existence of great numbers of persons, and to be recognised and understood by all. neither could i then appreciate the general culture of the understanding, which results from the habitual exercise of the feelings, and is thus carried down into the most uneducated classes of several countries on the continent, in a degree not equalled in england among the so-called educated, except where an unusual tenderness of conscience leads to a habitual exercise of the intellect on questions of right and wrong. i did not know the way in which, among the ordinary english, the absence of interest in things of an unselfish kind, except occasionally in a special thing here and there, and the habit of not speaking to others, nor much even to themselves, about the things in which they do feel interest, causes both their feelings and their intellectual faculties to remain undeveloped, or to develop themselves only in some single and very limited direction; reducing them, considered as spiritual beings, to a kind of negative existence. all these things i did not perceive till long afterwards; but i even then felt, though without stating it clearly to myself, the contrast between the frank sociability and amiability of french personal intercourse, and the english mode of existence, in which everybody acts as if everybody else (with few, or no exceptions) was either an enemy or a bore. in france, it is true, the bad as well as the good points, both of individual and of national character, come more to the surface, and break out more fearlessly in ordinary intercourse, than in england: but the general habit of the people is to show, as well as to expect, friendly feeling in every one towards every other, wherever there is not some positive cause for the opposite. in england it is only of the best bred people, in the upper or upper middle ranks, that anything like this can be said.
this first introduction to the highest order of mountain scenery made the deepest impression on me, and gave a colour to my tastes through life. in october we proceeded by the beautiful mountain route of castres and st pons, from toulouse to montpellier, in which last neighbourhood sir samuel had just bought the estate of restincliere, near the foot of the singular mountain of st loup. during this residence in france i acquired a familiar knowledge of the french language, and acquaintance with the ordinary french literature; i took lessons in various bodily exercises, without becoming proficient in any of them; and at montpellier i attended the excellent winter courses of lectures at the faculte des sciences, those of m. anglada on chemistry, of m. provencal on zoology, and of a very accomplished representative of 18th century metaphysics, m. gergonne, on logic, under the name of philosophy of the sciences. i also went through a course of higher mathematics under the private tuition of m. lentheric, a professor at the lycee of montpellier. but perhaps the greatest of the many advantages i owed to this episode in my education was that of having for a whole year breathed the free and genial atmosphere of continental life. i could not then estimate this advantage, or even consciously feel it, but it was nonetheless real. having so little experience of english life, and the few people i knew being mostly ones who had at heart public objectives of a large and personally disinterested kind, i was ignorant of the low moral tone of society, as it is called in england: the habit of taking for granted implying it in every possible way without actually saying it that conduct is of course always directed towards low and trivial goals; the absence of high feelings, which shows itself by sneering depreciation of all demonstrations of them and by general abstinence (except among a few of the stricter religionists) from professing any high principles of action at all except in the preordained cases where such profession is put on as part of the costume and formalities of the occasion. i could not then know or estimate the difference between this manner of existence and that of a people like the french, whose faults, if equally real, are different. among them, elevated sentiments (or at least comparatively elevated ones) are the current coin of human conversation, both in books and in private life; and, though often turning gassy when they are announced, they are kept alive in the nation at large by constant exercise, and stimulated by sympathy, so as to form a living and active part of the existence of very many persons and to be recognised and understood by all. nor could i then appreciate the general development of the understanding that results from the habitual exercise of the feelings, and is thus carried down into the most uneducated classes in several european countries in a degree not equalled in england among the so-called educated, except where an unusual sensitivity of conscience leads to an habitual exercise of the intellect on questions of right and wrong. i did not know the way in which, among the ordinary english, the absence of interest in things of an unselfish kind except occasionally in a special thing here and there, and the habit of not speaking to others (nor much even to themselves) about the things in which they do feel interest, causes their feelings and their intellectual faculties to remain undeveloped, or to develop only in some single and very limited direction reducing them, considered as spiritual beings, to a kind of negative existence. i did not perceive these things till long afterwards; but even back then i felt, though without stating it clearly to myself, the contrast between the frank sociability and amiability of french personal conversation and the english mode of existence in which everybody acts as if almost everybody else was either an enemy or a bore. in france, it is true, the bad as well as the good points of individual and of national character come more to the surface, and break out more fearlessly in ordinary conversation, than in england; but the general habit of the people is to show, as well as to expect, friendly feeling in everyone towards everyone except where there is some positive cause for the opposite. in england nothing like this can be said except about the best bred people in the upper or upper-middle ranks.

in my way through paris, both going and returning, i passed some time in the house of m. say, the eminent political economist, who was a friend and correspondent of my father, having become acquainted with him on a visit to england a year or two after the peace. he was a man of the later period of the french revolution, a fine specimen of the best kind of french republican, one of those who had never bent the knee to bonaparte though courted by him to do so; a truly upright, brave, and enlightened man. he lived a quiet and studious life, made happy by warm affections, public and private. he was acquainted with many of the chiefs of the liberal party, and i saw various noteworthy persons while staying at this house; among whom i have pleasure in the recollection of having once seen saint-simon, not yet the founder either of a philosophy or a religion, and considered only as a clever original. the chief fruit which i carried away from the society i saw, was a strong and permanent interest in continental liberalism, of which i ever afterwards kept myself au courant, as much as of english politics: a thing not at all usual in those days with englishmen, and which had a very salutary influence on my development, keeping me free from the error always prevalent in england and from which even my father, with all his superiority to prejudice, was not exempt of judging universal questions by a merely english standard. after passing a few weeks at caen with an old friend of my father's, i returned to england in july, 1821 and my education resumed its ordinary course.
in my way through paris, both going and returning, i passed some time in the house of m. say, the eminent political economist, who was a friend and correspondent of my father, having become acquainted with him on a visit to england a year or two after the peace. he was a man of the later period of the french revolution, a fine specimen of the best kind of french republican, one of those who had never bent the knee to bonaparte though courted by him to do so; a truly upright, brave, and enlightened man. he lived a quiet and studious life, made happy by warm public and private affections. he was acquainted with many of the chiefs of the liberal party, and i saw various noteworthy persons while staying at his house. i enjoy the memory of having once seen saint-simon, not yet the founder of a philosophy or of a religion, and considered only as a clever eccentric. what i mainly carried away from the society i saw was a strong and permanent interest in continental liberalism, on which i ever afterwards kept myself up to date as much as on english politics, a very unusual thing with englishmen in those days. it had a very salutary influence on my development, keeping me free from the error always prevalent in england, even my father being guilty of it of judging universal questions by a merely english standard. after passing a few weeks at caen with an old friend of my father's i returned to england in july 1821; and my education resumed its ordinary course.

chapter iii last stage of education, and first of self-education
part 3: last stage of education and first of self-education

for the first year or two after my visit to france, i continued my old studies, with the addition of some new ones. when i returned, my father was just finishing for the press his elements of political economy, and he made me perform an exercise on the manuscript, which mr. bentham practised on all his own writings, making what he called marginal contents; a short abstract of every paragraph, to enable the writer more easily to judge of, and improve, the order of the ideas, and the general character of the exposition. soon after, my father put into my hands condillac's traite des sensations, and the logical and metaphysical volumes of his cours detudes; the first (notwithstanding the superficial resemblance between condillac's psychological system and my father's) quite as much for a warning as for an example. i am not sure whether it was in this winter or the next that i first read a history of the french revolution. i learnt with astonishment that the principles of democracy, then apparently in so insignificant and hopeless a minority everywhere in europe, had borne all before them in france thirty years earlier, and had been the creed of the nation. as may be supposed from this, i had previously a very vague idea of that great commotion. i knew only that the french had thrown off the absolute monarchy of louis xiv. and xv., had put the king and queen to death, guillotined many persons, one of whom was lavoisier, and had ultimately fallen under the despotism of bonaparte. from this time, as was natural, the subject took an immense hold of my feelings. it allied itself with all my juvenile aspirations to the character of a democratic champion. what had happened so lately, seemed as if it might easily happen again: and the most transcendent glory i was capable of conceiving, was that of figuring, successful or unsuccessful, as a girondist in an english convention.
for the first year or two after my visit to france i continued my old studies, with the addition of some new ones. when i returned, my father was just finishing for the press his elements of political economy, and he made me perform on the manuscript an exercise that mr bentham practised on all his own writings, making what he called marginal contents, namely a short abstract of every paragraph, to enable the writer more easily to evaluate and improve the order of the ideas and the general character of the exposition. soon after that my father put into my hands condillac's traite des sensations, and the logical and metaphysical volumes of his cours detudes. despite the superficial resemblance between condillac's psychological system and my father's, the traite was given to me quite as much for a warning as for an example. i am not sure whether it was in this winter or the next that i first read a history of the french revolution. i learned with astonishment that the principles of democracy, then apparently in so insignificant and hopeless a minority everywhere in europe, had carried all before them in france thirty years earlier, and had been the creed of the nation. i had previously had only a very vague idea of that great commotion. i knew only that the french had thrown off the absolute monarchy of louis xiv and xv, had put the king and queen to death, guillotined many persons including lavoisier, and had eventually fallen under the despotism of bonaparte. from this time, naturally, the subject took an immense hold of my feelings. it allied itself with all my juvenile aspirations to the character of a democratic champion. what had happened so recently seemed as if it might easily happen again: and the most transcendent glory i could conceive was that of figuring whether or not with success as a girondist in an english revolutionary convention.

during the winter of 1821-2, mr. john austin, with whom at the time of my visit to france my father had but lately become acquainted, kindly allowed me to read roman law with him. my father, notwithstanding his abhorrence of the chaos of barbarism called english law, had turned his thoughts towards the bar as on the whole less ineligible for me than any other profession: and these readings with mr. austin, who had made bentham's best ideas his own, and added much to them from other sources and from his own mind, were not only a valuable introduction to legal studies, but an important portion of general education. with mr. austin i read heineccius on the institutes, his roman antiquities, and part of his exposition of the pandects; to which was added a considerable portion of blackstone. it was at the commencement of these studies that my father, as a needful accompaniment to them, put into my hands bentham's principal speculations, as interpreted to the continent, and indeed to all the world, by dumont, in the traite de legislation. the reading of this book was an epoch in my life; one of the turning points in my mental history.
absorbing benthamism during the winter of 1821-2 mr john austin kindly allowed me to read roman law with him. (my father had become acquainted with him at the time of my visit to france.) despite my father's abhorrence of the chaos of barbarism called english law, he had turned his thoughts towards the bar as on the whole less ineligible for me than any other profession; and these readings with mr austin who had made bentham's best ideas his own, and added much to them from other sources and from his own mind were a valuable introduction to legal studies as well as an important portion of general education. with mr austin i read heineccius on the institutes, his roman antiquities, and part of his exposition of the pandects; to which was added a considerable portion of blackstone. it was at the start of these studies that my father put into my hands, as a needed accompaniment to them, bentham's principal speculations as interpreted to the continent (and indeed to all the world) by dumont in his traite de legislation. the reading of this book was an epoch in my life, one of the turning points in my mental history.

my previous education had been, in a certain sense, already a course of benthamism. the benthamic standard of the greatest happiness was that which i had always been taught to apply; i was even familiar with an abstract discussion of it, forming an episode in an unpublished dialogue on government, written by my father on the platonic model. yet in the first pages of bentham it burst upon me with all the force of novelty. what thus impressed me was the chapter in which bentham passed judgment on the common modes of reasoning in morals and legislation, deduced from phrases like law of nature, right reason, the moral sense, natural rectitude, and the like, and characterized them as dogmatism in disguise, imposing its sentiments upon others under cover of sounding expressions which convey no reason for the sentiment, but set up the sentiment as its own reason. it had not struck me before, that bentham's principle put an end to all this. the feeling rushed upon me, that all previous moralists were superseded, and that here indeed was the commencement of a new era in thought. this impression was strengthened by the manner in which bentham put into scientific form the application of the happiness principle to the morality of actions, by analysing the various classes and orders of their consequences. but what struck me at that time most of all, was the classification of offences, which is much more clear, compact, and imposing in dumont's redaction than in the original work of bentham from which it was taken. logic and the dialectics of plato, which had formed so large a part of my previous training, had given me a strong relish for accurate classification. this taste had been strengthened and enlightened by the study of botany, on the principles of what is called the natural method, which i had taken up with great zeal, though only as an amusement, during my stay in france; and when i found scientific classification applied to the great and complex subject of punishable acts, under the guidance of the ethical principle of pleasurable and painful consequences, followed out in the method of detail introduced into these subjects by bentham, i felt taken up to an eminence from which i could survey a vast mental domain, and see stretching out into the distance intellectual results beyond all computation. as i proceeded further, there seemed to be added to this intellectual clearness, the most inspiring prospects of practical improvement in human affairs. to bentham's general view of the construction of a body of law i was not altogether a stranger, having read with attention that admirable compendium, my father's article on jurisprudence: but i had read it with little profit, and scarcely any interest, no doubt from its extremely general and abstract character, and also because it concerned the form more than the substance of the corpus juris, the logic rather than the ethics of law. but bentham's subject was legislation, of which jurisprudence is only the formal part: and at every page he seemed to open a clearer and broader conception of what human opinions and institutions ought to be, how they might be made what they ought to be, and how far removed from it they now are. when i laid down the last volume of the traite, i had become a different being. the principle of utility, understood as bentham understood it, and applied in the manner in which he applied it through these three volumes, fell exactly into its place as the keystone which held together the detached and fragmentary component parts of my knowledge and beliefs. it gave unity to my conceptions of things. i now had opinions; a creed, a doctrine, a philosophy; in one among the best senses of the word, a religion; the inculcation and diffusion of which could be made the principal outward purpose of a life. and i had a grand conception laid before me of changes to be effected in the condition of mankind through that doctrine. the traite de legislation
my previous education had already been in a certain sense a course of benthamism. the benthamic standard of the greatest happiness was what i had always been taught to apply; i was even familiar with an abstract discussion of it, namely an episode in an unpublished dialogue on government, written by my father on the platonic model. yet in the first pages of bentham it burst on me with all the force of novelty. what thus impressed me was the chapter in which bentham passed judgment on the common modes of reasoning in morals and legislation, deduced from phrases like law of nature, right reason, the moral sense, natural rectitude and the like. and characterised them as dogmatism in disguise, imposing its sentiments on others under cover of high-sounding expressions that convey no reason for the sentiment but set up the sentiment as its own reason. it had not struck me before that bentham's principle put an end to all this. the feeling rushed upon me that all previous moralists were superseded, and that here indeed was the start of a new era in thought. this impression was strengthened by bentham's way of putting into scientific form the application of the happiness principle to the morality of actions, by analysing the various classes and orders of their consequences. but what struck me at the time most of all, was the classification of offences, which is much more clear, compact and imposing in dumont's edition than in the original work of bentham from which it was taken. logic and the dialectics of plato, which had formed so large a part of my previous training, had given me a strong liking for accurate classification. this taste had been strengthened and enlightened by the study of botany on the principles of the so-called natural method, which i had taken up with great zeal (though only as an amusement) during my stay in france; and when i found scientific classification applied to the great and complex subject of punishable acts under the guidance of the ethical principle of pleasurable and painful consequences, followed out into the level of detail introduced into these subjects by bentham, i felt taken up to a height from which i could survey a vast mental domain and see stretching out into the distance intellectual results beyond all computation. as i went further there seemed to be added to this intellectual clearness the most inspiring prospects of practical improvements in human affairs. i was not altogether a stranger to bentham's general view of the construction of a body of law, having read with attention my father's article jurisprudence, which is an admirable compendium of it; but i had read it with little profit and scarcely any interest, no doubt because of its extremely general and abstract character, and also because it concerned the form more than the substance of the body of the law, the logic rather than the ethics of law. but bentham's subject was legislation, of which jurisprudence is only the formal part; and on every page he seemed to open a clearer and broader conception of what human opinions and institutions ought to be, how they might be made what they ought to be, and how far removed from it they now are. when i laid down the last volume of the traite i had become a different being. the principle of utility, understood as bentham understood it and applied as he applied it through these three volumes, fell exactly into its place as the keystone that held together the detached and fragmentary component parts of my knowledge and beliefs. it gave unity to my conceptions of things. i now had opinions a creed, a doctrine, a philosophy, in one of the best senses of the word a religion the teaching and spreading of which could be made the principal outward purpose of a life. and i had a grand conception laid before me of how that doctrine would change the condition of mankind. the traitede legislation wound up with a picture to me a most impressive one of human life as it would be made by opinions and laws such as were recommended in the treatise. its predictions of practicable improvement were carefully moderate, writing off as day-dreams of vague enthusiasm many things that will one day seem so natural to human beings that injustice will probably be done to those who once thought them chimerical. but in my state of mind this appearance of superiority to illusion added to the effect that bentham's doctrines produced on me by heightening the impression of mental power; and the vista of improvement which he did open was sufficiently large and brilliant to light up my life and to give a definite shape to my aspirations.

after this i read, from time to time, the most important of the other works of bentham which had then seen the light, either as written by himself or as edited by dumont. this was my private reading: while, under my father's direction, my studies were carried into the higher branches of analytic psychology. i now read locke's essay, and wrote out an account of it, consisting of a complete abstract of every chapter, with such remarks as occurred to me; which was read by, or (i think) to, my father, and discussed throughout. i performed the same process with helvetius de lesprit, which i read of my own choice. this preparation of abstracts, subject to my father's censorship, was of great service to me, by compelling precision in conceiving and expressing psychological doctrines, whether accepted as truths or only regarded as the opinion of others. after helvetius, my father made me study what he deemed the really master-production in the philosophy of mind, hartley's observations on man. this book, though it did not, like the traite de legislation, give a new colour to my existence, made a very similar impression on me in regard to its immediate subject. hartley's explanation, incomplete as in many points it is, of the more complex mental phenomena by the law of association, commended itself to me at once as a real analysis, and made me feel by contrast the insufficiency of the merely verbal generalizations of condillac, and even of the instructive gropings and feelings about for psychological explanations, of locke. it was at this very time that my father commenced writing his analysis of the mind, which carried hartley's mode of explaining the mental phenomena to so much greater length and depth. he could only command the concentration of thought necessary for this work, during the complete leisure of his holiday for a month or six weeks annually: and he commenced it in the summer of 1822, in the first holiday he passed at dorking; in which neighbourhood, from that time to the end of his life, with the exception of two years, he lived, as far as his official duties permitted, for six months of every year. he worked at the analysis during several successive vacations, up to the year 1829, when it was published, and allowed me to read the manuscript, portion by portion, as it advanced. the other principal english writers on mental philosophy i read as i felt inclined, particularly berkeley, hume's essays, reid, dugald stewart and brown on cause and effect. brown's lectures i did not read until two or three years later, nor at that time had my father himself read them.
from time to time after this i read the most important of bentham's other works that had then appeared, either as written by himself or as edited by dumont. this was my private reading; while under my father's direction my studies were carried into the higher branches of analytic psychology. i now read locke's essay and wrote out an account of it, consisting of a complete abstract of every chapter together with such remarks as occurred to me; this was read by or (i think) to my father, and discussed throughout. i did the same thing with helvetius de lesprit, which i read of my own choice. this preparation of abstracts subject to my father's censorship was of great service to me, by compelling precision in conceiving and expressing psychological doctrines, whether accepted as truths or only regarded as the opinion of others. after helvetius my father made me study what he regarded as the really master-production in the philosophy of mind, hartley's observations on man. this book did not give a new colour to my existence as the traite de legislation did, but it made a very similar impression on me in regard to its immediate subject. hartley's use of the law of association to explain the more complex mental phenomena, though incomplete, commended itself to me at once as a real analysis, and made me feel by contrast the inadequacy of the merely verbal generalisations of condillac, and even of locke's instructive gropings for psychological explanations. it was at this very time that my father started writing his analysis of the mind, which carried hartley's way of explaining mental phenomena to so much greater length and depth. the concentration of thought necessary for this work was something he could manage only during the complete leisure of his annnual holiday of a month or six weeks; and he started it in the summer of 1822 in his first holiday at dorking a neighbourhood in which he lived, as far as his official duties permitted, for six months of every year but two for the rest of his life. he worked at the analysis during several successive vacations up to 1829 when it was published, and allowed me to read the manuscript piecemeal as it advanced. the other principal english writers on mental philosophy i read as i felt inclined, particularly berkeley, hume's essays, reid, dugald stewart and brown on cause and effect. i did not read brown's lectures until two or three years later, nor at that time had my father himself read them.

among the works read in the course of this year, which contributed materially to my development, i owe it to mention a book (written on the foundation of some of bentham's manuscripts and published under the pseudonyme of philip beauchamp) entitled analysis of the influence of natural religion on the temporal happiness of mankind. this was an examination not of the truth, but of the usefulness of religious belief, in the most general sense, apart from the peculiarities of any special revelation; which, of all the parts of the discussion concerning religion, is the most important in this age, in which real belief in any religious doctrine is feeble and precarious, but the opinion of its necessity for moral and social purposes almost universal; and when those who reject revelation, very generally take refuge in an optimistic deism, a worship of the order of nature, and the supposed course of providence, at least as full of contradictions, and perverting to the moral sentiments, as any of the forms of christianity, if only it is as completely realized. yet very little, with any claim to a philosophical character, has been written by sceptics against the usefulness of this form of belief. the volume bearing the name of philip beauchamp had this for its special object. having been shown to my father in manuscript, it was put into my hands by him, and i made a marginal analysis of it as i had done of the elements of political economy. next to the traite de legislation, it was one of the books which by the searching character of its analysis produced the greatest effect upon me. on reading it lately after an interval of many years, i find it to have some of the defects as well as the merits of the benthamic modes of thought, and to contain, as i now think, many weak arguments, but with a great overbalance of sound ones, and much good material for a more completely philosophic and conclusive treatment of the subject.
the usefulness of religion among the works that i read during this year, and that contributed materially to my development, i ought to mention a book (written on the basis of some of bentham's manuscripts and published under the pseudonym philip beauchamp) entitled analysis of the influence of natural religion on the temporal happiness of mankind. this was an examination not of the truth but of the usefulness of religious belief, in the most general sense of that phrase, apart from the details of any special revelation. in all the discussion concerning religion the question of its usefulness is the most important in this age, when real belief in any religious doctrine is feeble and precarious but the opinion of its necessity for moral and social purposes almost universal; and when those who reject revelation usually take refuge in an optimistic deism a worship of the order of nature and of the supposed course of providence which, when it is worked out in detail, is at least as full of contradictions and as perverting to the moral sentiments as any of the forms of christianity. yet very little with any claim to a philosophical character has been written by sceptics against the usefulness of this form of belief. the volume by philip beauchamp had this as its special topic. having been shown it in manuscript, my father put it into my hands, and i made a marginal analysis of it as i had done of the elements of political economy. next to the traite de legislation, it was one of the books that produced the greatest effect on me by the searching character of its analysis. on reading it recently after an interval of many years, i find it to have some of the defects as well as the merits of the benthamic modes of thought, and to contain (i now think) many weak arguments, but with a great overbalance of sound ones and much good material for a more completely philosophical and conclusive treatment of the subject.

i have now, i believe, mentioned all the books which had any considerable effect on my early mental development. from this point i began to carry on my intellectual cultivation by writing still more than by reading. in the summer of 1822 i wrote my first argumentative essay. i remember very little about it, except that it was an attack on what i regarded as the aristocratic prejudice, that the rich were, or were likely to be, superior in moral qualities to the poor. my performance was entirely argumentative, without any of the declamation which the subject would admit of, and might be expected to suggest to a young writer. in that department, however, i was, and remained, very inapt. dry argument was the only thing i could, manage, or willingly attempted; though passively i was very susceptible to the effect of all composition, whether in the form of poetry or oratory, which appealed to the feelings on any basis of reason. my father, who knew nothing of this essay until it was finished, was well satisfied, and, as i learnt from others, even pleased with it; but, perhaps from a desire to promote the exercise of other mental faculties than the purely logical, he advised me to make my next exercise in composition one of the oratorical kind; on which suggestion, availing myself of my familiarity with greek history and ideas, and with the athenian orators, i wrote two speeches, one an accusation, the other a defence of pericles, on a supposed impeachment for not marching out to fight the lacedemonians on their invasion of attica. after this i continued to write papers on subjects often very much beyond my capacity, but with great benefit both from the exercise itself, and from the discussions which it led to with my father.
i have now, i believe, mentioned all the books that had any considerable effect on my early mental development. from this point i began to carry on my intellectual cultivation by writing even more than by reading. in the summer of 1822 at the age of 16 i wrote my first argumentative essay. i remember very little about it except that it was an attack on what i regarded as the aristocratic prejudice that the rich were likely to be superior in moral qualities to the poor. my performance was entirely argumentative, without any of the declamation that the subject would admit of and might be expected to suggest to a young writer. but in that department of rhetoric i was incompetent, and remain so. dry argument was the only thing i could manage, or willingly tried, though passively i was very susceptible to the effect of all composition whether poetry or oratory which appealed to the feelings on any basis of reason. my father knew nothing of this essay until it was finished. he was well satisfied with it and (as i learned from others) even pleased with it; but, perhaps from a desire to promote the exercise of mental faculties other than the purely logical one, he advised me to make my next exercise in composition one of the oratorical kind. on that suggestion, availing myself of my familiarity with greek history and ideas and with the athenian orators, i wrote two speeches, one an accusation of pericles and the other a defence of him, on a supposed impeachment for not fighting the lacedaemonians when they invaded attica. after this i continued to write papers on subjects that were often far beyond my capacity, but with great benefit from the exercise itself and from the discussions with my father that it led to.

i had now also begun to converse, on general subjects, with the instructed men with whom i came in contact: and the opportunities of such contact naturally became more numerous. the two friends of my father from whom i derived most, and with whom i most associated, were mr. grote and mr. john austin. the acquaintance of both with my father was recent, but had ripened rapidly into intimacy. mr. grote was introduced to my father by mr. ricardo, i think in 1819 (being then about twenty-five years old), and sought assiduously his society and conversation. already a highly instructed man, he was yet, by the side of my father, a tyro in the great subjects of human opinion; but he rapidly seized on my father's best ideas; and in the department of political opinion he made himself known as early as 1820, by a pamphlet in defence of radical reform, in reply to a celebrated article by sir james mackintosh, then lately published in he edinburgh review. mr. grote's father, the banker, was, i believe, a thorough tory, and his mother intensely evangelical; so that for his liberal opinions he was in no way indebted to home influences. but, unlike most persons who have the prospect of being rich by inheritance, he had, though actively engaged in the business of banking, devoted a great portion of time to philosophic studies; and his intimacy with my father did much to decide the character of the next stage in his mental progress. him i often visited, and my conversations with him on political, moral, and philosophical subjects gave me, in addition to much valuable instruction, all the pleasure and benefit of sympathetic communion with a man of the high intellectual and moral eminence which his life and writings have since manifested to the world.
i had now also begun to converse on general subjects with the educated men with whom i came in contact, and the opportunities for such contact naturally became more numerous. the two friends of my father from whom i derived most, and with whom i most associated, were mr george grote and mr john austin. the acquaintance of both with my father was recent, but had ripened rapidly into intimacy. mr grote was introduced to my father by mr ricardo, i think in 1819 (when grote was about 25 years old), and sought assiduously his society and conversation. already a highly educated man, he was by comparison with my father a mere beginner on the great subjects of human opinion; but he rapidly seized on my father's best ideas; and in political-opinion circles he made himself known as early as 1820 by a pamphlet in defence of radical reform, in reply to a celebrated article by sir james mackintosh recently published in the edinburgh review. mr grote's banker father was a thorough tory, i believe, and his mother was intensely evangelical; so that he was in no way indebted to home influences for his liberal opinions. but, unlike most persons who have the prospect of being rich by inheritance, he had while actively engaged in the business of banking also devoted much time to philosophical studies; and his intimacy with my father did much to decide the character of the next stage in his mental progress. i often visited him, and my conversations with him on political, moral, and philosophical subjects gave me, in addition to much valuable instruction, all the pleasure and benefit of sympathetic communion with a man of the high intellectual and moral eminence that his life and writings have since shown to the world.

mr. austin, who was four or five years older than mr. grote, was the eldest son of a retired miller in suffolk, who had made money by contracts during the war, and who must have been a man of remarkable qualities, as i infer from the fact that all his sons were of more than common ability and all eminently gentlemen. the one with whom we are now concerned, and whose writings on jurisprudence have made him celebrated, was for some time in the army, and served in sicily under lord william bentinck. after the peace he sold his commission and studied for the bar, to which he had been called for some time before my father knew him. he was not, like mr. grote, to any extent, a pupil of my father, but he had attained, by reading and thought, a considerable number of the same opinions, modified by his own very decided individuality of character. he was a man of great intellectual powers, which in conversation appeared at their very best; from the vigour and richness of expression with which, under the excitement of discussion, he was accustomed to maintain some view or other of most general subjects; and from an appearance of not only strong, but deliberate and collected will; mixed with a certain bitterness, partly derived from temperament, and partly from the general cast of his feelings and reflections. the dissatisfaction with life and the world, felt more or less in the present state of society and intellect by every discerning and highly conscientious mind, gave in his case a rather melancholy tinge to the character, very natural to those whose passive moral susceptibilities are more than proportioned to their active energies. for it must be said, that the strength of will of which his manner seemed to give such strong assurance, expended itself principally in manner. with great zeal for human improvement, a strong sense of duty, and capacities and acquirements the extent of which is proved by the writings he has left, he hardly ever completed any intellectual task of magnitude. he had so high a standard of what ought to be done, so exaggerated a sense of deficiencies in his own performances, and was so unable to content himself with the amount of elaboration sufficient for the occasion and the purpose, that he not only spoilt much of his work for ordinary use by overlabouring it, but spent so much time and exertion in superfluous study and thought, that when his task ought to have been completed, he had generally worked himself into an illness, without having half finished what he undertook. from this mental infirmity (of which he is not the sole example among the accomplished and able men whom i have known), combined with liability to frequent attacks of disabling though not dangerous ill-health, he accomplished, through life, little in comparison with what he seemed capable of; but what he did produce is held in the very highest estimation by the most competent judges; and, like coleridge, he might plead as a set-off that he had been to many persons, through his conversation, a source not only of much instruction but of great elevation of character. on me his influence was most salutary. it was moral in the best sense. he took a sincere and kind interest in me, far beyond what could have been expected towards a mere youth from a man of his age, standing, and what seemed austerity of character. there was in his conversation and demeanour a tone of high-mindedness which did not show itself so much, if the quality existed as much, in any of the other persons with whom at that time i associated. my intercourse with him was the more beneficial, owing to his being of a different mental type from all other intellectual men whom i frequented, and he from the first set himself decidedly against the prejudices and narrownesses which are almost sure to be found in a young man formed by a particular mode of thought or a particular social circle.
john austin, who was four or five years older than mr grote, was the eldest son of a retired suffolk miller who had made money by contracts during the war, and who must have been a man of remarkable qualities, as i infer from the fact that all his sons were of more than common ability and all eminently gentlemen. the one with whom we are now concerned, and whose writings on jurisprudence have made him celebrated, was for some time in the army, and served in sicily under lord william bentinck. after the peace he sold his commission and studied for the bar, to which he had been called for some time before my father knew him. unlike mr grote, he was not to any extent a pupil of my father, but his own reading and thought had brought him to many of the same opinions, modified by his own decided individuality of character. he was a man of great intellectual powers which appeared at their very best in conversation; from the vigour and richness of expression with which, under the excitement of discussion, he was accustomed to maintain some view of most general subjects; and from an appearance of strong, deliberate and collected will mixed with a certain bitterness derived partly from temperament and partly from the general cast of his feelings and reflections. the dissatisfaction with life and the world that is, in the present state of society and intellect, somewhat felt by every discerning and highly conscientious mind gave in his case a rather melancholy tinge to the character, this being very natural to someone whose passive moral susceptibilities are more vigorous than his active energies. for it must be said that the strength of will of which his manner seemed to give such strong assurance expended itself principally in manner. with great zeal for human improvement, a strong sense of duty, and capacities and acquirements the extent of which is proved by the writings he has left, he hardly ever completed any sizeable intellectual task. he had such a high standard of what ought to be done, such an exaggerated a sense of deficiencies in his own works, and so little ability to content himself with the amount of detail sufficient for the occasion and for the immediate purpose, that he not only spoilt much of his work for ordinary use by over-working it, but spent so much time and exertion in superfluous study and thought that when his task ought to have been completed he had generally worked himself into an illness without having half finished what he undertook. he is not the sole example of this mental infirmity among the accomplished and able men i have known. in john austin's case it was combined with a liability to frequent attacks of disabling though not dangerous ill-health, so that throughout his life he accomplished little in comparison with what he seemed capable of; but what he did produce is greatly admired by the most competent judges; and like coleridge he could plead in extenuation that through his conversation he had been to many persons a source of much instruction and of great elevation of character. his influence on me was most salutary. it was moral in the best sense. he took a sincere and kind interest in me, far beyond what could have been expected towards a mere youth from a man of his age, standing, and apparent austerity of character. his conversation and demeanour had a tone of high-mindedness that did not show itself so much if indeed the quality existed as much in anyone else i associated with at that time. my contacts with him were the more beneficial because he was of a different mental type from all other intellectual men whom i met often, and from the first set he himself decidedly against the prejudices and narrownesses that are almost sure to be found in a young man formed by a particular mode of thought or a particular social circle.

his younger brother, charles austin, of whom at this time and for the next year or two i saw much, had also a great effect on me, though of a very different description. he was but a few years older than myself, and had then just left the university, where he had shone with great eclat as a man of intellect and a brilliant orator and converser. the effect he produced on his cambridge contemporaries deserves to be accounted an historical event; for to it may in part be traced the tendency towards liberalism in general, and the benthamic and politico-economic form of it in particular, which showed itself in a portion of the more active-minded young men of the higher classes from this time to 1830. the union debating society, at that time at the height of its reputation, was an arena where what were then thought extreme opinions, in politics and philosophy, were weekly asserted, face to face with their opposites, before audiences consisting of the elite of the cambridge youth: and though many persons afterwards of more or less note (of whom lord macaulay is the most celebrated) gained their first oratorical laurels in those debates, the really influential mind among these intellectual gladiators was charles austin. he continued, after leaving the university, to be, by his conversation and personal ascendency, a leader among the same class of young men who had been his associates there; and he attached me among others to his car. through him i became acquainted with macaulay, hyde and charles villiers, strutt (now lord belper), romilly (now lord romilly and master of the rolls), and various others who subsequently figured in literature or politics, and among whom i heard discussions on many topics, as yet to a certain degree new to me. the influence of charles austin over me differed from that of the persons i have hitherto mentioned, in being not the influence of a man over a boy, but that of an elder contemporary. it was through him that i first felt myself, not a pupil under teachers, but a man among men. he was the first person of intellect whom i met on a ground of equality, though as yet much his inferior on that common ground. he was a man who never failed to impress greatly those with whom he came in contact, even when their opinions were the very reverse of his. the impression he gave was that of boundless strength, together with talents which, combined with such apparent force of will and character, seemed capable of dominating the world. those who knew him, whether friendly to him or not, always anticipated that he would play a conspicuous part in public life. it is seldom that men produce so great an immediate effect by speech, unless they, in some degree, lay themselves out for it; and he did this in no ordinary degree. he loved to strike, and even to startle. he knew that decision is the greatest element of effect, and he uttered his opinions with all the decision he could throw into them, never so well pleased as when he astonished anyone by their audacity. very unlike his brother, who made war against the narrower interpretations and applications of the principles they both professed, he, on the contrary, presented the benthamic doctrines in the most startling form of which they were susceptible, exaggerating everything in them which tended to consequences offensive to anyone's preconceived feelings. all which, he defended with such verve and vivacity, and carried off by a manner so agreeable as well as forcible, that he always either came off victor, or divided the honours of the field. it is my belief that much of the notion popularly entertained of the tenets and sentiments of what are called benthamites or utilitarians had its origin in paradoxes thrown out by charles austin. it must be said, however, that his example was followed, haud passibus aequis, by younger proselytes, and that to outrer whatever was by anybody considered offensive in the doctrines and maxims of benthamism, became at one time the badge of a small coterie of youths. all of these who had anything in them, myself among others, quickly outgrew this boyish vanity; and those who had not, became tired of differing from other people, and gave up both the good and the bad part of the heterodox opinions they had for some time professed.
his younger brother charles austin, whom i saw much of at this time and for the next year or two, also had a great effect on me, though of a very different kind. he was only a few years older than myself, and had just left the university, where he had shone with great eclat as a man of intellect and a brilliant orator and converser. the effect he produced on his cambridge contemporaries deserves to counted as an historical event, because it is one cause of the tendency towards liberalism in general, and the benthamic and politico-economic form of it in particular, that appeared in some of the more active-minded young men of the higher classes from this time to 1830. the union debating society, at that time at the height of its reputation, was an arena where political and philosophical opinions that were then thought extreme were weekly asserted, face to face with their opposites, before audiences consisting of the elite of the cambridge youth: and though many noteworthy persons (of whom lord macaulay is the most celebrated) later gained their first oratorical laurels in those debates, the really influential mind among these intellectual gladiators was charles austin. after he left the university his conversation and personal ascendancy continued to make him a leader among the same class of young men who had been his associates there; and he attached me among others to his chariot. through him i became acquainted with macaulay, hyde and charles villiers, strutt (now lord belper), romilly (now lord romilly and master of the rolls), and various others who subsequently figured in literature or politics, and among whom i heard discussions on many topics that were still somewhat new to me. the influence of charles austin over me differed from that of the other persons i have mentioned in being the influence of an older contemporary rather than of a man over a boy. it was through him that i first felt myself to be not a pupil under teachers but a man among men. he was the first person of intellect whom i met on a ground of equality, though still much his inferior on that common ground. he always greatly impressed those he came in contact with, even when their opinions were the opposite of his. the impression he gave was that of boundless strength, together with talents which combined with such apparent force of will and character seemed capable of dominating the world. those who knew him, whether friendly to him or not, always expected him to play a conspicuous part in public life. it is seldom that men produce such an immediate effect by speech unless they in some degree prepare to do so; and he did this in no ordinary degree. he loved to strike, and even to startle. he knew that decision is the greatest element of effect, and he uttered his opinions with all the decision he could throw into them, never so well pleased as when he astonished anyone by their audacity. very unlike his brother, who made war against the narrower interpretations and applications of the principles they both professed, he presented the benthamic doctrines in the most startling possible form, exaggerating everything in them that tended to consequences offensive to anyone's preconceived feelings. all of which he defended with such verve and vivacity, and carried off by a manner so agreeable as well as forcible, that he always either came off victor or divided the honours of the field. i believe that much of the notion popularly entertained of the tenets and sentiments of benthamites or utilitarians had its origin in paradoxes thrown out by charles austin. it must be said, however, that his example was followed in an inferior way by younger converts, and that to parade anything that anyone considered offensive in the doctrines and maxims of benthanism became at one time the badge of a small coterie of youths. all of these who had anything in them, myself among others, quickly outgrew this boyish vanity; and those who didn't outgrow it became tired of differing from other people and gave up both the good and the bad part of the heterodox opinions they had professed.

it was in the winter of 1822-3 that i formed the plan of a little society, to be composed of young men agreeing in fundamental principles acknowledging utility as their standard in ethics and politics, and a certain number of the principal corollaries drawn from it in the philosophy i had accepted and meeting once a fortnight to read essays and discuss questions conformably to the premises thus agreed on. the fact would hardly be worth mentioning, but for the circumstance, that the name i gave to the society i had planned was the utilitarian society. it was the first time that anyone had taken the title of utilitarian; and the term made its way into the language, from this humble source. i did not invent the word, but found it in one of galt's novels, the annals of the parish, in which the scotch clergyman, of whom the book is a supposed autobiography, is represented as warning his parishioners not to leave the gospel and become utilitarians. with a boy's fondness for a name and a banner i seized on the word, and for some years called myself and others by it as a sectarian appellation; and it came to be occasionally used by some others holding the opinions which it was intended to designate. as those opinions attracted more notice, the term was repeated by strangers and opponents, and got into rather common use just about the time when those who had originally assumed it, laid down that along with other sectarian characteristics. the society so called consisted at first of no more than three members, one of whom, being mr. bentham's amanuensis, obtained for us permission to hold our meetings in his house. the number never, i think, reached ten, and the society was broken up in 1826. it had thus an existence of about three years and a half. the chief effect of it as regards myself, over and above the benefit of practice in oral discussion, was that of bringing me in contact with several young men at that time less advanced than myself, among whom, as they professed the same opinions, i was for some time a sort of leader, and had considerable influence on their mental progress. any young man of education who fell in my way, and whose opinions were not incompatible with those of the society, i endeavoured to press into its service; and some others i probably should never have known, had they not joined it. those of the members who became my intimate companions no one of whom was in any sense of the word a disciple, but all of them independent thinkers on their own basis were william eyton tooke, son of the eminent political economist, a young man of singular worth both moral and intellectual, lost to the world by an early death; his friend william ellis, an original thinker in the field of political economy, now honourably known by his apostolic exertions for the improvement of education; george graham, afterwards official assignee of the bankruptcy court, a thinker of originality and power on almost all abstract subjects; and (from the time when he came first to england to study for the bar in 1824 or 1825) a man who has made considerably more noise in the world than any of these, john arthur roebuck.
the utilitarian society in the winter of 1822-3, at the age of 17, i formed the plan of a little society, to be composed of young men agreeing in fundamental principles acknowledging utility as their standard in ethics and politics, and a certain number of the principal corollaries drawn from it in the philosophy i had accepted and meeting once a fortnight to read essays and discuss questions in line with the premises thus agreed on. the fact would hardly be worth mentioning if it weren't for the fact that the name i gave to the society i had planned was the utilitarian society. it was the first time anyone had taken the title utilitarian, and the word made its way into the language from this humble source. i did not invent the word, but found it in galt's novel annals of the parish, in which the scotch clergyman of whom the book is a supposed autobiography warns his parishioners not to leave the gospel and become utilitarians. with a boy's fondness for a name and a banner i seized on the word, and for some years called myself and others by it as a sectarian label; and it came to be occasionally used by some others holding the opinions it was intended to designate. as those opinions attracted more notice the term was repeated by strangers and opponents, and came into rather common use just about the time when those who had originally taken it up laid it down, along with other sectarian characteristics. the so-called society consisted at first of no more than three members, one of whom, being mr bentham's amanuensis, obtained for us permission to hold our meetings in his house. the number of members never reached ten, and the society was broken up in 1826. it had thus an existence of about three and a half years. its chief effect on me, apart from the benefit of practice in oral discussion, was bringing me into contact with several young men who were at that time less advanced than myself. as they professed the same opinions as i had, i was for some time a sort of leader among them, and had considerable influence on their mental progress. i tried to press into its service any young man of education whose path crossed mine and whose opinions were compatible with those of the society; and there were others whom i probably would never have known if they had not joined it. those of the members who became my intimate companions not one of whom was in any sense a disciple, all of them standing on their own feet as independent thinkers were william eyton tooke, son of the eminent political economist, a young man of singular worth both moral and intellectual, lost to the world by an early death; his friend william ellis, an original thinker in the field of political economy, now honourably known by his apostolic exertions for the improvement of education; george graham, afterwards an official assignee of the bankruptcy court, a thinker of originality and power on most abstract subjects; and (from when he came first to england to study for the bar in 1824 or 1825) a man who has made more noise in the world than any of these, john arthur roebuck.

in may, 1823, my professional occupation and status for the next thirty-five years of my life, were decided by my father's obtaining for me an appointment from the east india company, in the office of the examiner of india correspondence, immediately under himself. i was appointed in the usual manner, at the bottom of the list of clerks, to rise, at least in the first instance, by seniority; but with the understanding that i should be employed from the beginning in preparing drafts of despatches, and be thus trained up as a successor to those who then filled the higher departments of the office. my drafts of course required, for some time, much revision from my immediate superiors, but i soon became well acquainted with the business, and by my father's instructions and the general growth of my own powers, i was in a few years qualified to be, and practically was, the chief conductor of the correspondence with india in one of the leading departments, that of the native states. this continued to be my official duty until i was appointed examiner, only two years before the time when the abolition of the east india company as a political body determined my retirement. i do not know any one of the occupations by which a subsistence can now be gained, more suitable than such as this to anyone who, not being in independent circumstances, desires to devote a part of the twenty-four hours to private intellectual pursuits. writing for the press cannot be recommended as a permanent resource to anyone qualified to accomplish anything in the higher departments of literature or thought: not only on account of the uncertainty of this means of livelihood, especially if the writer has a conscience, and will not consent to serve any opinions except his own; but also because the writings by which one can live are not the writings which themselves live, and are never those in which the writer does his best. books destined to form future thinkers take too much time to write, and when written come, in general, too slowly into notice and repute, to be relied on for subsistence. those who have to support themselves by their pen must depend on literary drudgery, or at best on writings addressed to the multitude; and can employ in the pursuits of their own choice, only such time as they can spare from those of necessity; which is generally less than the leisure allowed by office occupations, while the effect on the mind is far more enervating and fatiguing. for my own part i have, through life, found office duties an actual rest from the other mental occupations which i have carried on simultaneously with them. they were sufficiently intellectual not to be a distasteful drudgery, without being such as to cause any strain upon the mental powers of a person used to abstract thought, or to the labour of careful literary composition. the drawbacks, for every mode of life has its drawbacks, were not, however, unfelt by me. i cared little for the loss of the chances of riches and honours held out by some of the professions, particularly the bar, which had been, as i have already said, the profession thought of for me. but i was not indifferent to exclusion from parliament, and public life: and i felt very sensibly the more immediate unpleasantness of confinement to london; the holiday allowed by india house practice not exceeding a month in the year, while my taste was strong for a country life, and my sojourn in france had left behind it an ardent desire of travelling. but though these tastes could not be freely indulged, they were at no time entirely sacrificed. i passed most sundays, throughout the year, in the country, taking long rural walks on that day even when residing in london. the month's holiday was, for a few years, passed at my father's house in the country; afterwards a part or the whole was spent in tours, chiefly pedestrian, with some one or more of the young men who were my chosen companions; and, at a later period, in longer journeys or excursions, alone or with other friends. france, belgium, and rhenish germany were within easy reach of the annual holiday: and two longer absences, one of three, the other of six months, under medical advice, added switzerland, the tyrol, and italy to my list. fortunately, also, both these journeys occurred rather early, so as to give the benefit and charm of the remembrance to a large portion of life.
earning a living in may 1823 my professional occupation and status for the next 35 years of my life were decided by my father's obtaining for me an appointment from the east india company, immediately under himself in the office of the examiner of india correspondence. i was appointed in the usual manner at the bottom of the list of clerks, to rise at first by seniority; but with the understanding that i would be employed from the beginning in preparing drafts of despatches, thus being trained as a successor to those who then filled the higher departments of the office. for some time my drafts of course required much revision from my immediate superiors, but i soon became well acquainted with the business, and by my father's instructions and the general growth of my own powers i was in a few years qualified to be and practically was the chief conductor of the correspondence with india in one of the leading departments, that of the native states. this continued to be my official duty until i was appointed examiner, only two years before my retirement was brought about by the abolition of the east india company as a political body. of all the occupations by which one can now earn a living, i do not know any more suitable than this for someone who does not have an independent income and wants to devote a part of each 24 hours to private intellectual pursuits. writing for the press cannot be recommended as a permanent resource to anyone qualified to accomplish anything in the higher reaches of literature or thought, because of the uncertainty of this means of livelihood, especially if the writer has a conscience, and will not consent to serve any opinions except his own, and also because the writings by which one can live are not the writings which themselves live, and are never those in which the writer does his best. books destined to form future thinkers take too much time to write, and usually when written come too slowly into notice and repute, to be relied on for a livelihood. those who have to support themselves by their pen must depend on literary drudgery, or at best on writings addressed to the multitude; and they can employ in the pursuits of their own choice only such time as they can spare from those of necessity; which is generally less than the leisure allowed by office occupations, while the effect on the mind is far more enervating and fatiguing. for my own part i have always found office duties an actual rest from the other mental occupations that i have carried on simultaneously with them. they were sufficiently intellectual not to be a distasteful drudgery, without being such as to cause any strain on the mental powers of a person used to abstract thought or careful literary composition. every mode of life has its drawbacks, and i was conscious of some of the drawbacks of mine. i cared little for the loss of the chances of riches and honours held out by some of the professions, particularly the bar, which had been the profession thought of for me. but i was not indifferent to exclusion from parliament and public life: and i felt very strongly the more immediate unpleasantness of confinement to london. my india-house employment allowed at most a month's holiday each year, while my taste was strong for a country life, and my time in france had given me an ardent desire to travel. but though these tastes could not be freely indulged, they were never entirely sacrificed. i passed most sundays in the country, taking long rural walks on that day even when residing in london. for a few years the month's holiday was spent at my father's house in the country; afterwards some or all of each holiday was spent in tours, chiefly on foot, with one or more of the young men who were my chosen companions; and at a later period in longer journeys or excursions, alone or with other friends. france, belgium, and rhenish germany were within easy reach of the annual holiday; and two longer absences under medical advice one of three months, one of six added switzerland, the tyrol, and italy to my list. both these journeys occurred rather early, so as to give the benefit and charm of the remembrance to a large portion of life.

i am disposed to agree with what has been surmised by others, that the opportunity which my official position gave me of learning by personal observation the necessary conditions of the practical conduct of public affairs, has been of considerable value to me as a theoretical reformer of the opinions and institutions of my time. not, indeed, that public business transacted on paper, to take effect on the other side of the globe, was of itself calculated to give much practical knowledge of life. but the occupation accustomed me to see and hear the difficulties of every course, and the means of obviating them, stated and discussed deliberately with a view to execution: it gave me opportunities of perceiving when public measures, and other political facts, did not produce the effects which had been expected of them, and from what causes; above all, it was valuable to me by making me, in this portion of my activity, merely one wheel in a machine, the whole of which had to work together. as a speculative writer, i should have had no one to consult but myself, and should have encountered in my speculations none of the obstacles which would have started up whenever they came to be applied to practice. but as a secretary conducting political correspondence, i could not issue an order, or express an opinion, without satisfying various persons very unlike myself, that the thing was fit to be done. i was thus in a good position for finding out by practice the mode of putting a thought which gives it easiest admittance into minds not prepared for it by habit; while i became practically conversant with the difficulties of moving bodies of men, the necessities of compromise, the art of sacrificing the non-essential to preserve the essential. i learnt how to obtain the best i could, when i could not obtain everything; instead of being indignant or dispirited because i could not have entirely my own way, to be pleased and encouraged when i could have the smallest part of it; and when even that could not be, to bear with complete equanimity the being overruled altogether. i have found, through life, these acquisitions to be of the greatest possible importance for personal happiness, and they are also a very necessary condition for enabling anyone, either as theorist or as practical man, to effect the greatest amount of good compatible with his opportunities.
i am inclined to agree with what has been surmised by others, that the opportunity my official position gave me of learning by personal observation the necessary conditions of the practical conduct of public affairs has been of considerable value to me as a theoretical reformer of the opinions and institutions of my time. not that public business transacted on paper, to take effect on the other side of the globe, was in itself apt to give much practical knowledge of life! but the occupation accustomed me to see and hear the difficulties of every course and the means of meeting them stated and discussed deliberately with a view to action; it gave me opportunities to see when public measures and other political facts did not produce the effects that had been expected of them, and from what causes; above all, it was valuable to me by making me in this activity merely one wheel in a machine that had to work together as a whole. as a purely theoretical writer i would have had no-one to consult but myself, and my thinking would not have presented any of the obstacles that would have started up whenever my theories came to be applied in practice. but as a secretary conducting political correspondence, i could not issue an order or express an opinion without satisfying various persons very unlike myself that the thing was fit to be done. i was thus in a good position for finding out by practice the formulation of a thought that gives it easiest admittance into minds not prepared for it by habit; while i became practically familiar with the difficulties of moving bodies of men, the need for compromise, the art of sacrificing the non-essential to preserve the essential. i learned, when i could not obtain everything, (i) how to obtain the best i could; (ii) to be pleased and encouraged when i could have the smallest part of what i wanted, instead of being indignant or dispirited because i could not have it all; and (iii) to bear with complete equanimity being overruled altogether when that happened. throughout my life i have found these acquisitions to be of the greatest possible importance for personal happiness, and they are also needed for anyone to bring about, either as theorist or as practical man, the greatest amount of good compatible with his opportunities.

chapter iv youthful propagandism. the westminster review
part 4: youthful propagandism. the westminster review

ceased to be the merely whig organ it was before, and during the next ten years became to a considerable extent a vehicle of the opinions of the utilitarian radicals. this was mainly by what black himself wrote, with some assistance from fonblanque, who first showed his eminent qualities as a writer by articles and jeux d'esprit in the chronicle. the defects of the law, and of the administration of justice, were the subject on which that paper rendered most service to improvement. up to that time hardly a word had been said, except by bentham and my father, against that most peccant part of english institutions and of their administration. it was the almost universal creed of englishmen, that the law of england, the judicature of england, the unpaid magistracy of england, were models of excellence. i do not go beyond the mark in saying, that after bentham, who supplied the principal materials, the greatest share of the merit of breaking down this wretched superstition belongs to black, as editor of the morning chronicle. he kept up an incessant fire against it, exposing the absurdities and vices of the law and the courts of justice, paid and unpaid, until he forced some sense of them into people's minds. on many other questions he became the organ of opinions much in advance of any which had ever before found regular advocacy in the newspaper press. black was a frequent visitor of my father, and mr. grote used to say that he always knew by the monday morning's article whether black had been with my father on the sunday. black was one of the most influential of the many channels through which my father's conversation and personal influence made his opinions tell on the world; cooperating with the effect of his writings in making him a power in the country such as it has rarely been the lot of an individual in a private station to be, through the mere force of intellect and character: and a power which was often acting the most efficiently where it was least seen and suspected. i have already noticed how much of what was done by ricardo, hume, and grote was the result, in part, of his prompting and persuasion. he was the good genius by the side of brougham in most of what he did for the public, either on education, law reform, or any other subject. and his influence flowed in minor streams too numerous to be specified. this influence was now about to receive a great extension by the foundation of the westminster review.
the occupation of so much of my time by office work did not relax my attention to my own pursuits, which were never carried on more vigorously. it was about this time that i began to write in newspapers. the first writings of mine that went into print were two letters published towards the end of 1822, in the traveller evening newspaper (which afterwards grew into the globe and traveller by the purchase and incorporation of the globe). it was then the property of the well-known political economist colonel torrens. under the editorship of the able mr walter coulson (who was an amanuensis of mr bentham, then a reporter, then an editor, then a barrister and conveyancer, and died counsel to the home office) it had become one of the most important newspaper organs of liberal politics. colonel torrens himself wrote much of the political economy of his paper; and had at this time attacked some opinion of ricardo and my father, to which (at my father's instigation) i attempted an answer; and coulson, out of consideration for my father and goodwill to me, published it. there was a reply by torrens, to which i responded. soon after that i attempted something considerably more ambitious. the prosecutions of richard carlile and his wife and sister for publications hostile to christianity were then exciting much attention, and nowhere more than among the people in my circle. back then freedom of discussion in religion or even in politics was far from being the conceded point that it seems to be now, at least in theory; and the holders of obnoxious opinions had to be always ready to argue and re-argue for the liberty of expressing them. i wrote a series of five letters, signed wickliffe, going over the whole length and breadth of the question of free publication of all opinions on religion, and offered them to the morning chronicle. three of them were published early in 1823; the other two, containing things too outspoken for that journal, never appeared at all. but a paper that i wrote soon after on the same subject, apropos of a debate in the house of commons, was published as a leading article; and during the whole of 1823 a good number of my contributions were printed in the chronicle and traveller sometimes notices of books, but more often letters commenting on some nonsense talked in parliament or some defect of the law or misdoings of the magistracy or the courts of justice. in this last department the chronicle was now doing important service. after the death of mr perry, the editorship and management of the paper had come to mr john black, long a reporter on the paper, a man of most extensive reading and information, great honesty and simplicity of mind, a particular friend of my father's, imbued with many of his and bentham's ideas, which he reproduced in his articles among other valuable thoughts with great facility and skill. from this time the chronicle ceased to be the merely whig organ it had been, and during the next ten years became to a considerable extent a vehicle of the opinions of the utilitarian radicals. this was mainly through what black himself wrote, with some assistance from fonblanque, who first showed his eminent qualities as a writer by articles and jeux d'esprit in the chronicle. that paper rendered most service to improvement in connection with the defects of the law and of the administration of justice. up to that time hardly a word had been said, except by bentham and my father, against that most defective part of english institutions and of their administration. it was the almost universal creed of englishmen that the law of england, the judicature of england, the unpaid magistracy of england, were models of excellence. after bentham, who supplied the principal materials, the greatest share of the merit of breaking down this wretched superstition belongs to black as editor of the morning chronicle. he kept up an incessant fire against it, exposing the absurdities and vices of the law and the courts of justice, paid and unpaid, until he forced some sense of them into people's minds. on many other questions he became the organ of opinions that were much in advance of any that had ever before been regularly advocated in the newspaper press. black was a frequent visitor of my father, and mr grote used to say that he always knew by the monday morning's article whether black had been with my father on the sunday! black was one of the most influential of the many channels through which my father's conversation and personal influence made his opinions tell on the world, cooperating with the effect of his writings in making him a power in the country such as an individual in a private station has seldom managed to be through the mere force of intellect and character a power that was often acting the most efficiently where it was least seen and suspected. i have already noted how much of what was done by ricardo, hume, and grote resulted partly from his prompting and persuasion. he was the good genius by the side of brougham in most of what he did for the public on education, law reform, or any other subject. and his influence flowed in minor streams too numerous to be specified. this influence was now about to receive a great extension by the foundation of the westminster review. the westminster review

contrary to what may have been supposed, my father was in no degree a party to setting up the westminster review. the need of a radical organ to make head against the edinburgh and quarterly (then in the period of their greatest reputation and influence) had been a topic of conversation between him and mr. bentham many years earlier, and it had been a part of their chateau en espagne that my father should be the editor; but the idea had never assumed any practical shape. in 1823, however, mr. bentham determined to establish the review at his own cost, and offered the editorship to my father, who declined it as incompatible with his india house appointment. it was then entrusted to mr. (now sir john) bowring, at that time a merchant in the city. mr. bowring had been for two or three years previous an assiduous frequenter of mr. bentham, to whom he was recommended by many personal good qualities, by an ardent admiration for bentham, a zealous adoption of many, though not all of his opinions, and, not least, by an extensive acquaintanceship and correspondence with liberals of all countries, which seemed to qualify him for being a powerful agent in spreading bentham's fame and doctrines through all quarters of the world. my father had seen little of bowring, but knew enough of him to have formed a strong opinion, that he was a man of an entirely different type from what my father considered suitable for conducting a political and philosophical review: and he augured so ill of the enterprise that he regretted it altogether, feeling persuaded not only that mr. bentham would lose his money, but that discredit would probably be brought upon radical principles. he could not, however, desert mr. bentham, and he consented to write an article for the first number. as it had been a favourite portion of the scheme formerly talked of, that part of the work should be devoted to reviewing the other reviews, this article of my father's was to be a general criticism of the edinburgh review from its commencement. before writing it he made me read through all the volumes of the review, or as much of each as seemed of any importance (which was not so arduous a task in 1823 as it would be now), and make notes for him of the articles which i thought he would wish to examine, either on account of their good or their bad qualities. this paper of my father's was the chief cause of the sensation which the westminster review produced at its first appearance, and is, both in conception and in execution, one of the most striking of all his writings. he began by an analysis of the tendencies of periodical literature in general; pointing out, that it cannot, like books, wait for success, but must succeed immediately or not at all, and is hence almost certain to profess and inculcate the opinions already held by the public to which it addresses itself, instead of attempting to rectify or improve those opinions. he next, to characterize the position of the edinburgh review as a political organ, entered into a complete analysis, from the radical point of view, of the british constitution. he held up to notice its thoroughly aristocratic character: the nomination of a majority of the house of commons by a few hundred families; the entire identification of the more independent portion, the county members, with the great landholders; the different classes whom this narrow oligarchy was induced, for convenience, to admit to a share of power; and finally, what he called its two props, the church, and the legal profession. he pointed out the natural tendency of an aristocratic body of this composition, to group itself into two parties, one of them in possession of the executive, the other endeavouring to supplant the former and become the predominant section by the aid of public opinion, without any essential sacrifice of the aristocratical predominance. he described the course likely to be pursued, and the political ground occupied, by an aristocratic party in opposition, coquetting with popular principles for the sake of popular support. he showed how this idea was realized in the conduct of the whig party, and of the edinburgh review as its chief literary organ. he described, as their main characteristic, what he termed seesaw; writing alternately on both sides of the question which touched the power or interest of the governing classes; sometimes in different articles, sometimes in different parts of the same article: and illustrated his position by copious specimens. so formidable an attack on the whig party and policy had never before been made; nor had so great a blow ever been struck, in this country, for radicalism; nor was there, i believe, any living person capable of writing that article except my father.
this paper of my father's was the chief cause of the sensation that the westminster review produced at its first appearance, and is in conception and execution one of the most striking of all his writings. he began with an analysis of the tendencies of periodical literature in general; pointing out that it cannot wait for success, as books can, but must succeed immediately or not at all, so that it is almost certain to profess and inculcate opinions already held by the public to which it addresses itself, instead of attempting to rectify or improve those opinions. next, in order to characterise the position of the edinburgh review as a political organ he entered into a complete analysis, from the radical point of view, of the british constitution. he called attention to its thoroughly aristocratic character: the nomination of a majority of the house of commons by a few hundred families; the entire identification of the more independent part, the county members, with the great landholders; the different classes whom this narrow oligarchy found it convenient to admit to a share of power; and finally, what he called the constitution's two props, the church, and the legal profession. he pointed out the natural tendency of an aristocratic body of this type to group itself into two parties, one possessing the executive, the other trying to supplant the former and become the predominant section with the aid of public opinion, without any essential sacrifice of the aristocratic predominance. he described the course likely to be pursued, and the political ground occupied, by an aristocratic party in opposition, coquetting with popular principles for the sake of popular support. he showed how this idea was put to work in the conduct of the whig party and of the edinburgh review as its chief literary organ. he described as their main characteristic what he termed seesaw, writing alternately on both sides of every question which touched the power or interest of the governing classes sometimes in different articles, sometimes in different parts of the same article and he illustrated this with many examples. such a formidable attack on the whig party and policy had never before been made; and in this country such a great blow had never been struck for radicalism; and i don't think there was any living person other than my father who could have written that article.

in the meantime the nascent review had formed a junction with another project, of a purely literary periodical, to be edited by mr. henry southern, afterwards a diplomatist, then a literary man by profession. the two editors agreed to unite their corps, and divide the editorship, bowring taking the political, southern the literary department. southern's review was to have been published by longman, and that firm, though part proprietors of the edinburgh, were willing to be the publishers of the new journal. but when all the arrangements had been made, and the prospectuses sent out, the longmans saw my father's attack on the edinburgh, and drew back. my father was now appealed to for his interest with his own publisher, baldwin, which was exerted with a successful result. and so in april, 1824, amidst anything but hope on my father's part, and that of most of those who afterwards aided in carrying on the review, the first number made its appearance.
other doings of the westminster review in the meantime the newborn review had joined with a project for a purely literary periodical, to be edited by mr henry southern, a literary man by profession and afterwards a diplomat. the two editors agreed to unite their forces and divide the editorship, bowring taking the political department and southern the literary one. southern's review was to have been published by longman, and that firm, though part proprietors of the edinburgh review, were willing to be the publishers of the new journal. but when all the arrangements had been made and the prospectuses sent out, the longmans saw my father's attack on the edinburgh, and withdrew. my father was now appealed to for his influence on his own publisher, baldwin, which was exerted with a successful result. and so in april 1824, amidst anything but hope on the part of my father and of most of those who afterwards aided in carrying on the review, the first number made its appearance.

that number was an agreeable surprise to most of us. the average of the articles was of much better quality than had been expected. the literary and artistic department had rested chiefly on mr. bingham, a barrister (subsequently a police magistrate), who had been for some years a frequenter of bentham, was a friend of both the austins, and had adopted with great ardour mr. bentham's philosophical opinions. partly from accident, there were in the first number as many as five articles by bingham; and we were extremely pleased with them. i well remember the mixed feeling i myself had about the review; the joy of finding, what we did not at all expect, that it was sufficiently good to be capable of being made a creditable organ of those who held the opinions it professed; and extreme vexation, since it was so good on the whole, at what we thought the blemishes of it. when, however, in addition to our generally favourable opinion of it, we learned that it had an extraordinary large sale for a first number, and found that the appearance of a radical review, with pretensions equal to those of the established organs of parties, had excited much attention, there could be no room for hesitation, and we all became eager in doing everything we could to strengthen and improve it.
that number was an agreeable surprise to most of us. the average of the articles was of much better quality than had been expected. the literary and artistic department had rested chiefly on mr bingham, a barrister (subsequently a police magistrate), who had been for some years a frequenter of bentham, was a friend of both the austins, and had adopted mr bentham's philosophical opinions with great ardour. partly from accident, there were in the first number as many as five articles by bingham; and we were extremely pleased with them. i well remember the mixed feeling i myself had about the review; the joy at finding as we did not at all expect that it was good enough to be capable of being made a creditable organ of those who held the opinions it professed; and extreme vexation, since it was so good on the whole, at what we thought to be its blemishes. but when in addition to our generally favourable opinion of it we learned that it had an extraordinarily large sale for a first number, and found that the appearance of a radical review with claims equal to those of the established organs of parties had aroused much attention, there could be no room for hesitation, and we all became eager to do everything we could to strengthen and improve it.

my father continued to write occasional articles. the quarterly review received its exposure, as a sequel to that of the edinburgh. of his other contributions, the most important were an attack on southey's book of the church, in the fifth number, and a political article in the twelfth. mr. austin only contributed one paper, but one of great merit, an argument against primogeniture, in reply to an article then lately published in the edinburgh review by mcculloch. grote also was a contributor only once; all the time he could spare being already taken up with his history of greece. the article he wrote was on his own subject, and was a very complete exposure and castigation of mitford. bingham and charles austin continued to write for some time; fonblanque was a frequent contributor from the third number. of my particular associates, ellis was a regular writer up to the ninth number; and about the time when he left off, others of the set began; eyton tooke, graham, and roebuck. i was myself the most frequent writer of all, having contributed, from the second number to the eighteenth, thirteen articles; reviews of books on history and political economy, or discussions on special political topics, as corn laws, game laws, law of libel. occasional articles of merit came in from other acquaintances of my father's, and, in time, of mine; and some of mr. bowring's writers turned out well. on the whole, however, the conduct of the review was never satisfactory to any of the persons strongly interested in its principles, with whom i came in contact. hardly ever did a number come out without containing several things extremely offensive to us, either in point of opinion, of taste, or by mere want of ability. the unfavourable judgments passed by my father, grote, the two austins, and others, were re-echoed with exaggeration by us younger people; and as our youthful zeal rendered us by no means backward in making complaints, we led the two editors a sad life. from my knowledge of what i then was, i have no doubt that we were at least as often wrong as right; and i am very certain that if the review had been carried on according to our notions (i mean those of the juniors), it would have been no better, perhaps not even so good as it was. but it is worth noting as a fact in the history of benthamism, that the periodical organ, by which it was best known, was from the first extremely unsatisfactory to those whose opinions on all subjects it was supposed specially to represent.
my father continued to write occasional articles. the quarterly review received its exposure, as a sequel to that of the edinburgh. the most important of his other contributions were an attack on southey's book of the church in the fifth number, and a political article in the twelfth. mr austin contributed only one paper, but one of great merit, an argument against primogeniture, in reply to an article recently published in the edinburgh review by mcculloch. grote also was a contributor only once; all the time he could spare being already taken up with his history of greece. the article he wrote was on his own subject, and was a very complete exposure and castigation of the history of greece by william mitford. bingham and charles austin continued to write for some time; fonblanque was a frequent contributor from the third number. of my particular associates, ellis was a regular writer up to the ninth number; and at about the time when he left off, others of the set began eyton tooke, graham, and roebuck. i was myself the most frequent writer of all, having contributed, from the second number to the eighteenth, thirteen articles; reviews of books on history and political economy, or discussions on special political topics, such as corn laws, game laws, laws of libel. occasional articles of merit came in from other acquaintances of my father's and later on of mine; and some of mr bowring's writers turned out well. on the whole, however, the conduct of the westminster review was never satisfactory to any of the persons strongly interested in its principles with whom i came in contact. almost every number contained several things extremely offensive to us, either in point of opinion, of taste, or by mere want lack ability. the unfavourable judgments passed by my father, grote, the two austins, and others, were re-echoed with exaggeration by us younger people; and as our youthful zeal made us by no means backward in making complaints, we led the two editors a sad life. from my knowledge of what i then was, i have no doubt that we were at least as often wrong as right; and i am certain that if the review had been carried on according to our notions (i mean those of the juniors) it would have been no better than it was and perhaps worse. but it is worth noting as a fact in the history of benthamism that the periodical by which it was best known was from the first extremely unsatisfactory to those whose opinions on all subjects it was supposed specially to represent.

meanwhile, however, the review made considerable noise in the world, and gave a recognised status, in the arena of opinion and discussion, to the benthamic type of radicalism, out of all proportion to the number of its adherents, and to the personal merits and abilities, at that time, of most of those who could be reckoned among them. it was a time, as is known, of rapidly rising liberalism. when the fears and animosities accompanying the war with france had been brought to an end, and people had once more a place in their thoughts for home politics, the tide began to set towards reform. the renewed oppression of the continent by the old reigning families, the countenance apparently given by the english government to the conspiracy against liberty called the holy alliance, and the enormous weight of the national debt and taxation occasioned by so long and costly a war, rendered the government and parliament very unpopular. radicalism, under the leadership of the burdetts and cobbetts, had assumed a character and importance which seriously alarmed the administration: and their alarm had scarcely been temporarily assuaged by the celebrated six acts, when the trial of queen caroline roused a still wider and deeper feeling of hatred. though the outward signs of this hatred passed away with its exciting cause, there arose on all sides a spirit which had never shown itself before, of opposition to abuses in detail. mr. hume's persevering scrutiny of the public expenditure, forcing the house of commons to a division on every objectionable item in the estimates, had begun to tell with great force on public opinion, and had extorted many minor retrenchments from an unwilling administration. political economy had asserted itself with great vigour in public affairs, by the petition of the merchants of london for free trade, drawn up in 1820 by mr. tooke and presented by mr. alexander baring; and by the noble exertions of ricardo during the few years of his parliamentary life. his writings, following up the impulse given by the bullion controversy, and followed up in their turn by the expositions and comments of my father and mcculloch (whose writings in the edinburgh review during those years were most valuable), had drawn general attention to the subject, making at least partial converts in the cabinet itself; and huskisson, supported by canning, had commenced that gradual demolition of the protective system, which one of their colleagues virtually completed in 1846, though the last vestiges were only swept away by mr. gladstone in 1860. mr. peel, then home secretary, was entering cautiously into the untrodden and peculiarly benthamic path of law reform. at this period, when liberalism seemed to be becoming the tone of the time, when improvement of institutions was preached from the highest places, and a complete change of the constitution of parliament was loudly demanded in the lowest, it is not strange that attention should have been roused by the regular appearance in controversy of what seemed a new school of writers, claiming to be the legislators and theorists of this new tendency. the air of strong conviction with which they wrote, when scarcely anyone else seemed to have an equally strong faith in as definite a creed; the boldness with which they tilted against the very front of both the existing political parties; their uncompromising profession of opposition to many of the generally received opinions, and the suspicion they lay under of holding others still more heterodox than they professed; the talent and verve of at least my father's articles, and the appearance of a corps behind him sufficient to carry on a review; and finally, the fact that the review was bought and read, made the so-called bentham school in philosophy and politics fill a greater place in the public mind than it had held before, or has ever again held since other equally earnest schools of thought have arisen in england. as i was in the headquarters of it, knew of what it was composed, and as one of the most active of its very small number, might say without undue assumption, quorum pars magna fui, it belongs to me more than to most others, to give some account of it.
meanwhile, however, the westminster review made considerable noise in the world and gave to the benthamic type of radicalism a recognised status out of all proportion to the number of its adherents and to the personal merits and abilities, at that time, of most of them. it was a time, as is known, of rapidly rising liberalism. when the fears and animosities accompanying the war with france had been brought to an end, and people again had a place in their thoughts for home politics, the tide began to set towards reform. the renewed oppression of the continent by the old reigning families, the english government's apparent acceptance of the conspiracy against liberty called the holy alliance, and the enormous weight of the national debt and taxation caused by that long and costly war, made the government and parliament very unpopular. radicalism, under the leadership of the burdetts and cobbetts, had acquired a character and importance that seriously alarmed the administration; and no sooner had their alarm been temporarily assuaged by the celebrated six acts than the trial of queen caroline for adultery aroused a still wider and deeper feeling of hatred. the outward signs of this hatred passed away with its cause, but there arose on all sides a spirit that had never appeared before, of detailed opposition to abuses. mr hume's persevering scrutiny of the public expenditure, forcing the house of commons to a division on every objectionable item in the estimates, had begun to have a great effect on public opinion and had extorted many minor retrenchments from an unwilling administration. political economy had asserted itself with great vigour in public affairs by the petition of the merchants of london for free trade, drawn up in 1820 by mr tooke and presented by mr alexander baring; and by the noble exertions of ricardo during the few years of his parliamentary life. his writings had drawn general attention to the subject, making at least partial converts in the cabinet itself; and huskisson, supported by canning, had started that gradual demolition of the protective system that one of their colleagues virtually completed in 1846, though the last vestiges were not swept away until mr gladstone did it in 1860. mr peel, then home secretary, was entering cautiously into the untrodden and especially benthamic path of law reform. at this period, when liberalism seemed to be becoming the tone of the time, improvement of institutions was preached from the highest places, and a complete change of the constitution of parliament was loudly demanded in the lowest, it is not surprising that attention should have been aroused by the regular appearance in controversy of what seemed to be a new school of writers claiming to be the legislators and theorists of this new tendency. because of the air of strong conviction with which they wrote, when scarcely anyone else seemed to have an equally strong faith in any creed as definite as theirs; the boldness of their head-on assaults on both the existing political parties; their uncompromising announcement of opposition to many of the generally accepted opinions, and the general suspicion that they held others still more heterodox than the ones they announced; the talent and verve of (at least) my father's articles, and the appearance of a corps behind him sufficient to carry on a review; and finally the fact that the westminster review was bought and read, the so-called bentham school in philosophy and politics came to fill a greater place in the public mind than it had held before, or has ever held again since other equally earnest schools of thought have arisen in england. as i was in the headquarters of it, knew what it was composed of, and as one of the most active of its very small number might fairly claim that i was a great part of it, it belongs to me more than to most others to give some account of it.

this supposed school, then, had no other existence than what was constituted by the fact, that my father's writings and conversation drew round him a certain number of young men who had already imbibed, or who imbibed from him, a greater or smaller portion of his very decided political and philosophical opinions. the notion that bentham was surrounded by a band of disciples who received their opinions from his lips, is a fable to which my father did justice in his fragment on mackintosh, and which, to all who knew mr. bentham's habits of life and manner of conversation, is simply ridiculous. the influence which bentham exercised was by his writings. through them he has produced, and is producing, effects on the condition of mankind, wider and deeper, no doubt, than any which can be attributed to my father. he is a much greater name in history. but my father exercised a far greater personal ascendency. he was sought for the vigour and instructiveness of his conversation, and did use it largely as an instrument for the diffusion of his opinions. i have never known any man who could do such ample justice to his best thoughts in colloquial discussion. his perfect command over his great mental resources, the terseness and expressiveness of his language and the moral earnestness as well as intellectual force of his delivery, made him one of the most striking of all argumentative conversers: and he was full of anecdote, a hearty laugher, and, when with people whom he liked, a most lively and amusing companion. it was not solely, or even chiefly, in diffusing his merely intellectual convictions that his power showed itself: it was still more through the influence of a quality, of which i have only since learnt to appreciate the extreme rarity: that exalted public spirit, and regard above all things to the good of the whole, which warmed into life and activity every germ of similar virtue that existed in the minds he came in contact with: the desire he made them feel for his approbation, the shame at his disapproval; the moral support which his conversation and his very existence gave to those who were aiming at the same objects, and the encouragement he afforded to the fainthearted or desponding among them, by the firm confidence which (though the reverse of sanguine as to the results to be expected in any one particular case) he always felt in the power of reason, the general progress of improvement, and the good which individuals could do by judicious effort.
this supposed school had no other existence than what was constituted by the fact that my father's writings and conversation drew round him a certain number of young men who had already imbibed, or who imbibed from him, some portion of his very decided political and philosophical opinions. the notion that bentham was surrounded by a band of disciples who received their opinions from his lips is a fable to which my father did justice in his fragment on mackintosh, and which is simply ridiculous to all who knew mr bentham's habits of life and manner of conversation. the influence bentham exercised was through his writings. through them he has produced, and is producing, effects on the condition of mankind that are doubtless wider and deeper than any that can be attributed to my father. he is a much greater name in history. but my father exercised a far greater personal ascendancy. he was sought for the vigour and instructiveness of his conversation, and did use that largely as an instrument for the diffusion of his opinions. i have never known any man who could do such ample justice to his best thoughts in colloquial discussion. his perfect command over his great mental resources, the terseness and expressiveness of his language, and the moral earnestness as well as intellectual force of his delivery, made him one of the most striking of all argumentative talkers; and he was full of anecdote, a hearty laugher, and a most lively and amusing companion when he was with people whom he liked. his power did not show itself solely, or even chiefly, in the spread of his merely intellectual convictions; it operated still more through the influence of his exalted public spirit and concern above all things for the good of the whole, which warmed into life and activity every germ of similar virtue that existed in the minds he came in contact with; the desire he made them feel for his approval, the shame at his disapproval; the moral support that his conversation and his very existence gave to those who were aiming at the same goals, and the encouragement he gave to the fainthearted or gloomy among them, by the firm confidence he always felt in the power of reason, the general progress of improvement, and the good that individuals could do by judicious effort (though he was pessimistic about the results to be expected in any one particular case). i have only since learned to appreciate the extreme rarity of this four-part quality.

if was my father's opinions which gave the distinguishing character to the benthamic or utilitarian propagandism of that time. they fell singly, scattered from him, in many directions, but they flowed from him in a continued stream principally in three channels. one was through me, the only mind directly formed by his instructions, and through whom considerable influence was exercised over various young men, who became, in their turn, propagandists. a second was through some of the cambridge contemporaries of charles austin, who, either initiated by him or under the general mental impulse which he gave, had adopted many opinions allied to those of my father, and some of the more considerable of whom afterwards sought my father's acquaintance and frequented his house. among these may be mentioned strutt, afterwards lord belper, and the present lord romilly, with whose eminent father, sir samuel, my father had of old been on terms of friendship. the third channel was that of a younger generation of cambridge undergraduates, contemporary, not with austin, but with eyton tooke, who were drawn to that estimable person by affinity of opinions, and introduced by him to my father: the most notable of these was charles buller. various other persons individually received and transmitted a considerable amount of my father's influence: for example, black (as before mentioned) and fonblanque: most of these, however, we accounted only partial allies; fonblanque, for instance, was always divergent from us on many important points. but indeed there was by no means complete unanimity among any portion of us, nor had any of us adopted implicitly all my father's opinions. for example, although his essay on government was regarded probably by all of us as a masterpiece of political wisdom, our adhesion by no means extended to the paragraph of it in which he maintains that women may, consistently with good government, be excluded from the suffrage, because their interest is the same with that of men. from this doctrine, i, and all those who formed my chosen associates, most positively dissented. it is due to my father to say that he denied having intended to affirm that women should be excluded, any more than men under the age of forty, concerning whom he maintained in the very next paragraph an exactly similar thesis. he was, as he truly said, not discussing whether the suffrage had better be restricted, but only (assuming that it is to be restricted) what is the utmost limit of restriction which does not necessarily involve a sacrifice of the securities for good government. but i thought then, as i have always thought since that the opinion which he acknowledged, no less than that which he disclaimed, is as great an error as any of those against which the essay was directed; that the interest of women is included in that of men exactly as much as the interest of subjects is included in that of kings, and no more; and that every reason which exists for giving the suffrage to anybody, demands that it should not be withheld from women. this was also the general opinion of the younger proselytes; and it is pleasant to be able to say that mr. bentham, on this important point, was wholly on our side.
it was my father's opinions that gave the benthamic or utilitarian propagandism of that time its distinguishing character. they fell singly, scattered from him in many directions, but they flowed from him in a continuous stream principally in three channels. one was through me, the only mind directly formed by his instructions, and through whom considerable influence was exercised over various young men who became propagandists in their turn. a second was through some of charles austin's cambridge contemporaries, who initiated by him or under the general mental impulse he gave had adopted many opinions allied to my father's. (some of the more considerable of these later sought my father's acquaintance and frequently visited his house. they included strutt, afterwards lord belper, and the present lord romilly, whose eminent father, sir samuel, was a long-term friend of my father's.) the third channel was that of a younger generation of cambridge undergraduates, contemporary not with austin but with eyton tooke, who were drawn to that estimable person by affinity of opinions, and introduced by him to my father; the most notable of these was charles buller. various other persons individually received and passed on a considerable amount of my father's influence for example, black (as before mentioned) and fonblanque. but we regarded most of these as only partial allies; fonblanque, for instance, always diverged from us on many important points. but there was in fact by no means complete unanimity among any sub-group of us, nor had any of us confidently adopted all my father's opinions. for example, although his essay on government was regarded probably by all of us as a masterpiece of political wisdom, our acceptance did not extend to the paragraph in which he maintains that consistently with good government women can be excluded from the suffrage because their interests are the same as men's. i most positively dissented from this doctrine, as did all my chosen associates. to be fair to my father: he denied having intended to affirm that women should be excluded, any more than should men under the age of 40, concerning whom he said the same thing in the next paragraph. he was, as he truly said, not discussing whether the suffrage ought to be restricted, but only (assuming that it is to be restricted) how much it could be restricted without interfering with the requirements for good government. but i thought then (and still do) that the opinion that he acknowledged, just as much as the one he disclaimed, is as great an error as any of those against which the essay was directed; that the interests of women are included in those of men exactly as much as the interests of subjects are included in those of kings; and that every reason for giving the suffrage to anyone demands that it not be withheld from women. this was also the general opinion of the younger converts, and it is pleasant to be able to say that mr bentham was wholly on our side on this important point.

but though none of us, probably, agreed in every respect with my father, his opinions, as i said before, were the principal element which gave its colour and character to the little group of young men who were the first propagators of what was afterwards called philosophic radicalism. their mode of thinking was not characterized by benthamism in any sense which has relation to bentham as a chief or guide, but rather by a combination of bentham's point of view with that of the modern political economy, and with the hartleian metaphysics. malthus's population principle was quite as much a banner, and point of union among us, as any opinion specially belonging to bentham. this great doctrine, originally brought forward as an argument against the indefinite improvability of human affairs, we took up with ardent zeal in the contrary sense, as indicating the sole means of realizing that improvability by securing full employment at high wages to the whole labouring population through a voluntary restriction of the increase of their numbers. the other leading characteristics of the creed, which we held in common with my father, may be stated as follows:
philosophic radicalism but though none of us agreed in every respect with my father, his opinions were the principal element that gave colour and character to the little group of young men who were the first propagators of what was afterwards called philosophic radicalism. their way of thinking was not characterised by benthamism in any sense implying that bentham was their chief or guide, but rather by a combination of bentham's point of view, the point of view of modern political economy, and hartley's metaphysics. malthus's population principle was quite as much a banner and point of union among us as any opinion specially belonging to bentham. this great doctrine was originally advanced as an argument against the indefinite improvability of human affairs; but we took it up with ardent zeal in the opposite direction, as showing the sole means of realising that improvability, namely by securing full employment at high wages to the whole labouring population through a voluntary restriction in the increase of their numbers. the other leading characteristics of the creed that we held in common with my father may be stated as follows. in politics, an almost unbounded confidence in the efficacy of two things: representative government, and complete freedom of discussion. so complete was my father's reliance on the influence of reason over the minds of mankind, whenever it is allowed to reach them, that he felt that all would be gained if the whole population were taught to read, all sorts of opinions were allowed to be addressed to them by orally and in writing, and by means of the suffrage they could nominate a legislature to give effect to the opinions they adopted.

in politics, an almost unbounded confidence in the efficacy of two things: representative government, and complete freedom of discussion. so complete was my father's reliance on the influence of reason over the minds of mankind, whenever it is allowed to reach them, that he felt as if all would be gained if the whole population were taught to read, if all sorts of opinions were allowed to be addressed to them by word and in writing, and if by means of the suffrage they could nominate a legislature to give effect to the opinions they adopted. he thought that when the legislature no longer represented a class interest, it would aim at the general interest, honestly and with adequate wisdom; since the people would be sufficiently under the guidance of educated intelligence, to make in general a good choice of persons to represent them, and having done so, to leave to those whom they had chosen a liberal discretion. accordingly aristocratic rule, the government of the few in any of its shapes, being in his eyes the only thing which stood between mankind and an administration of their affairs by the best wisdom to be found among them, was the object of his sternest disapprobation, and a democratic suffrage the principal article of his political creed, not on the ground of liberty, rights of man, or any of the phrases, more or less significant, by which, up to that time, democracy had usually been defended, but as the most essential of securities for good government. in this, too, he held fast only to what he deemed essentials; he was comparatively indifferent to monarchical or republican forms far more so than bentham, to whom a king, in the character of corrupter-general, appeared necessarily very noxious. next to aristocracy, an established church, or corporation of priests, as being by position the great depravers of religion, and interested in opposing the progress of the human mind, was the object of his greatest detestation; though he disliked no clergyman personally who did not deserve it, and was on terms of sincere friendship with several. in ethics his moral feelings were energetic and rigid on all points which he deemed important to human well being, while he was supremely indifferent in opinion (though his indifference did not show itself in personal conduct) to all those doctrines of the common morality, which he thought had no foundation but in asceticism and priestcraft. he looked forward, for example, to a considerable increase of freedom in the relations between the sexes, though without pretending to define exactly what would be, or ought to be, the precise conditions of that freedom. this opinion was connected in him with no sensuality either of a theoretical or of a practical kind. he anticipated, on the contrary, as one of the beneficial effects of increased freedom, that the imagination would no longer dwell upon the physical relation and its adjuncts, and swell this into one of the principal objects of life; a perversion of the imagination and feelings, which he regarded as one of the deepest seated and most pervading evils in the human mind. in psychology, his fundamental doctrine was the formation of all human character by circumstances, through the universal principle of association, and the consequent unlimited possibility of improving the moral and intellectual condition of mankind by education. of all his doctrines none was more important than this, or needs more to be insisted on; unfortunately there is none which is more contradictory to the prevailing tendencies of speculation, both in his time and since.
he thought that when the legislature no longer represented a class interest it would aim at the general interest, honestly and with adequate wisdom, because the people would be sufficiently guided by educated intelligence to make generally good choices of persons to represent them and then to leave their chosen representatives a liberal discretion. he held that aristocratic rule government of the few in any of its shapes was the only thing that stood between mankind and an administration of their affairs by the best wisdom to be found among them; and it was the object of his sternest disapproval. the principal article of his political creed was democratic suffrage, not on the grounds of liberty, rights of man, or any of the more or less meaningful phrases by which democracy had usually been defended, but as the most essential of securities for good government. in this too he held fast only to what he regarded as essentials; he was comparatively indifferent to monarchical or republican forms of government (far more so than bentham, to whom a king a corrupter-general appeared necessarily very noxious). second only to aristocracy, he detested an established church or corporation of priests, as being by position the great depravers of religion and interested in opposing the progress of the human mind. but he did not personally dislike any clergyman who did not deserve it, and was on terms of sincere friendship with several. in ethics, his moral feelings were energetic and rigid on everything that he thought important to human well being, while he was supremely indifferent to all the doctrines of common morality that he thought were based solely on asceticism and priest-craft. (this indifference was theoretical; it did not show itself in his personal conduct.) he looked forward, for example, to a considerable increase of freedom in the relations between the sexes, though without claiming to define exactly what would or should be the precise conditions of that freedom. this opinion was not connected in him with sensuality of either a theoretical or a practical kind. on the contrary, he expected that one of the beneficial effects of increased freedom would be that the imagination would no longer dwell on the physical relation between the sexes and swell this into one of the principal objects of life; a perversion of the imagination and feelings that he regarded as one of the deepest seated and most pervading evils in the human mind. in psychology, his basic doctrine was the formation of all human character by circumstances through the universal principle of association, and the consequent unlimited possibility of improving the moral and intellectual condition of mankind by education. of all his doctrines none was more important than this, or needs more to be insisted on: unfortunately there is none more contradictory to the dominant theoretical tendencies in his time and since.

these various opinions were seized on with youthful fanaticism by the little knot of young men of whom i was one: and we put into them a sectarian spirit, from which, in intention at least, my father was wholly free. what we (or rather a phantom substituted in the place of us) were sometimes, by a ridiculous exaggeration, called by others, namely a school, some of us for a time really hoped and aspired to be. the french philosophes of the eighteenth century were the examples we sought to imitate, and we hoped to accomplish no less results. no one of the set went to so great excesses in his boyish ambition as i did; which might be shown by many particulars, were it not an useless waste of space and time.
these various opinions were seized on with youthful fanaticism by the little knot of young men of whom i was one; and we put into them a sectarian spirit from which my father was, in intention at least, wholly free. it was a ridiculous exaggeration when we (or rather a phantom substitute for us) were sometimes called by others a school, but that is what some of us for a time really hoped to become. the french philosophes of the 18th century were the example we sought to imitate, and we hoped to accomplish no less results. no-one in the set went to such great excesses in this boyish ambition as i did.

all this, however, is properly only the outside of our existence; or, at least, the intellectual part alone, and no more than one side of that. in attempting to penetrate inward, and give any indication of what we were as human beings, i must be understood as speaking only of myself, of whom alone i can speak from sufficient knowledge; and i do not believe that the picture would suit any of my companions without many and great modifications.
what i was as a human being but all this is really only the outside of our existence, or at least it is only the intellectual part, and only one side of that. in trying to penetrate inward and give some indication of what we were as human beings, i must be understood to be speaking only of myself, the only one i can speak about from sufficient knowledge. the picture would have to be greatly modified, i believe, to fit any of my companions.

i conceive that the description so often given of a benthamite, as a mere reasoning machine, though extremely inapplicable to most of those who have been designated by that title, was during two or three years of my life not altogether untrue of me. it was perhaps as applicable to me as it can well be to anyone just entering into life, to whom the common objects of desire must in general have at least the attraction of novelty. there is nothing very extraordinary in this fact: no youth of the age i then was, can be expected to be more than one thing, and this was the thing i happened to be. ambition and desire of distinction i had in abundance; and zeal for what i thought the good of mankind was my strongest sentiment, mixing with and colouring all others. but my zeal was as yet little else, at that period of my life, than zeal for speculative opinions. it had not its root in genuine benevolence, or sympathy with mankind; though these qualities held their due place in my ethical standard. nor was it connected with any high enthusiasm for ideal nobleness. yet of this feeling i was imaginatively very susceptible; but there was at that time an intermission of its natural aliment, poetical culture, while there was a superabundance of the discipline antagonistic to it, that of mere logic and analysis. add to this that, as already mentioned, my father's teachings tended to the undervaluing of feeling. it was not that he was himself cold-hearted or insensible; i believe it was rather from the contrary quality; he thought that feeling could take care of itself; that there was sure to be enough of it if actions were properly cared about. offended by the frequency with which, in ethical and philosophical controversy, feeling is made the ultimate reason and justification of conduct, instead of being itself called on for a justification, while, in practice, actions the effect of which on human happiness is mischievous, are defended as being required by feeling, and the character of a person of feeling obtains a credit for desert, which he thought only due to actions, he had a real impatience of attributing praise to feeling, or of any but the most sparing reference to it, either in the estimation of persons or in the discussion of things. in addition to the influence which this characteristic in him had on me and others, we found all the opinions to which we attached most importance, constantly attacked on the ground of feeling. utility was denounced as cold calculation; political economy as hard-hearted; anti-population doctrines as repulsive to the natural feelings of mankind. we retorted by the word sentimentality, which, along with declamation and vague generalities, served us as common terms of opprobrium. although we were generally in the right, as against those who were opposed to us, the effect was that the cultivation of feeling (except the feelings of public and private duty) was not in much esteem among us, and had very little place in the thoughts of most of us, myself in particular. what we principally thought of, was to alter people's opinions; to make them believe according to evidence, and know what was their real interest, which when they once knew, they would, we thought, by the instrument of opinion, enforce a regard to it upon one another. while fully recognising the superior excellence of unselfish benevolence and love of justice, we did not expect the regeneration of mankind from any direct action on those sentiments, but from the effect of educated intellect, enlightening the selfish feelings. although this last is prodigiously important as a means of improvement in the hands of those who are themselves impelled by nobler principles of action, i do not believe that any one of the survivors of the benthamites or utilitarians of that day now relies mainly upon it for the general amendment of human conduct.
the description so often given of a benthamite as a mere reasoning machine was extremely inapplicable to most of those who have borne that label, but for two or three years of my life it was not altogether untrue of me. it was perhaps as applicable to me as it can be to anyone just entering into life, to whom the ordinary objects of desire must in general have at least the attraction of novelty. there is nothing very extraordinary in this fact: no youth of the age i then was can be expected to be more than one thing, and this was the thing i happened to be. i had plenty of ambition and desire for distinction, and zeal for what i thought the good of mankind was my strongest sentiment, mixing with and colouring all others. but at that period of my life my zeal was nothing much but zeal for theoretical opinions. it was not rooted in genuine benevolence or sympathy with mankind, though these qualities had their due place in my theoretical ethical standard. nor was it connected with any high enthusiasm for ideal nobleness. i was imaginatively very susceptible to this feeling; but there was in my life at that time a shortage of its natural food, poetical culture, while there was a superabundance of the discipline antagonistic to it, that of mere logic and analysis. add to this that my father's teachings tended to under-value feeling. it was not that he was himself cold-hearted or insensible; i believe it was rather from the contrary quality: he thought that feeling could take care of itself, that there was sure to be enough of it if actions were properly cared about. offended by how often in ethical and philosophical controversy feeling is made the ultimate reason and justification of conduct, instead of being itself called on for a justification, while, in practice actions that are harmful to human happiness are defended as being required by feeling, and the character of a person of feeling is regarded as meritorious in a way that my father thought appropriate only for actions, he had a real impatience with attributing praise to feeling or any but the most sparing reference to it in the estimation of persons or in the discussion of things. in addition to the influence this characteristic of his had on me and others, we found all the opinions to which we attached most importance being constantly attacked on the ground of feeling. utility was denounced as cold calculation; political economy as hard-hearted; anti-population doctrines as repulsive to the natural feelings of mankind. we retorted by the word sentimentality which, along with declamation and vague generalities, served us as common terms of opprobrium. although we were generally in the right, as against those who were opposed to us, the effect was that the cultivation of feeling (except the feelings of public and private duty) was not in much esteem among us and had very little place in the thoughts of most of us, myself in particular. what we principally thought about was altering people's opinions making them believe according to evidence, and know what was their real interest. once they knew that, we thought, they would enforce a regard for it on one another through the instrument of opinion. while fully recognising the superior excellence of unselfish benevolence and love of justice, we did not expect the regeneration of mankind from any direct action on those sentiments, but from the effect of educated intellect, enlightening the selfish feelings. although this last is prodigiously important as a means of improvement in the hands of those who are themselves impelled by nobler principles of action, i do not believe that any of the survivors of the benthamites or utilitarians of that day now relies mainly on it for the general amendment of human conduct.

from this neglect both in theory and in practice of the cultivation of feeling, naturally resulted, among other things, an undervaluing of poetry, and of imagination generally, as an element of human nature. it is, or was, part of the popular notion of benthamites, that they are enemies of poetry: this was partly true of bentham himself; he used to say that all poetry is misrepresentation: but in the sense in which he said it, the same might have been said of all impressive speech; of all representation or inculcation more oratorical in its character than a sum in arithmetic. an article of bingham's in the first number of the westminster review, in which he offered as an explanation of something which he disliked in moore, that mr. moore is a poet, and therefore is not a reasoner, did a good deal to attach the notion of hating poetry to the writers in the review. but the truth was that many of us were great readers of poetry; bingham himself had been a writer of it, while as regards me (and the same thing might be said of my father), the correct statement would be, not that i disliked poetry, but that i was theoretically indifferent to it. i disliked any sentiments in poetry which i should have disliked in prose; and that included a great deal. and i was wholly blind to its place in human culture, as a means of educating the feelings. but i was always personally very susceptible to some kinds of it. in the most sectarian period of my benthamism, i happened to look into pope's essay on man, and, though every opinion in it was contrary to mine, i well remember how powerfully it acted on my imagination. perhaps at that time poetical composition of any higher type than eloquent discussion in verse, might not have produced a similar effect upon me: at all events i seldom gave it an opportunity. this, however, was a mere passive state. long before i had enlarged in any considerable degree the basis of my intellectual creed, i had obtained, in the natural course of my mental progress, poetic culture of the most valuable kind, by means of reverential admiration for the lives and characters of heroic persons; especially the heroes of philosophy. the same inspiring effect which so many of the benefactors of mankind have left on record that they had experienced from plutarch's lives, was produced on me by plato's pictures of socrates, and by some modern biographies, above all by condorcet's life of turgot; a book well calculated to rouse the best sort of enthusiasm, since it contains one of the wisest and noblest of lives, delineated by one of the wisest and noblest of men. the heroic virtue of these glorious representatives of the opinions with which i sympathized, deeply affected me, and i perpetually recurred to them as others do to a favourite poet, when needing to be carried up into the more elevated regions of feeling and thought. i may observe by the way that this book cured me of my sectarian follies. the two or three pages beginning il regardait toute secte comme nuisible, and explaining why turgot always kept himself perfectly distinct from the encyclopedists, sank deeply into my mind. i left off designating myself and others as utilitarians, and by the pronoun we, or any other collective designation, i ceased to afficher sectarianism. my real inward sectarianism i did not get rid of till later, and much more gradually.
poetry this neglect in theory and in practice of the cultivation of feeling naturally led to, among other things, an under-valuing of poetry and of imagination generally as an element of human nature. it is or was part of the common notion of benthamites that they are enemies of poetry: this was partly true of bentham himself; he used to say that all poetry is misrepresentation; but in the sense in which he said it, the same might have been said of all impressive speech, all representation or inculcation more oratorical in its character than a sum in arithmetic. an article of bingham's in the first number of the westminster review, in which he offered as an explanation of something he disliked in moore that mr moore is a poet, and therefore is not a reasoner, did a good deal to attach the notion of hating poetry to the writers in the review. but the truth was that many of us were great readers of poetry; bingham himself had been a writer of it; and the correct statement about me (as about my father) would be not that i disliked poetry but that i was theoretically indifferent to it. i disliked any sentiments in poetry that i would have disliked in prose; and that included a great deal. and i was wholly blind to its place in human culture as a means of educating the feelings. but i was always personally very susceptible to some kinds of it. in the most sectarian period of my benthamism i happened to look into pope's essay on man, and though every opinion in it was contrary to mine, i well remember how powerfully it acted on my imagination. perhaps at that time poetical composition of any higher type than eloquent discussion in verse might not have produced a similar effect on me; anyway i seldom gave it an opportunity. but this was a mere passive state. long before i had enlarged much the basis of my intellectual creed, i had obtained in the natural course of my mental progress poetic culture of the most valuable kind through reverential admiration for the lives and characters of heroic persons, especially the heroes of philosophy. the same inspiring effect that so many of mankind's benefactors reported experiencing from plutarch's lives was produced on me by plato's pictures of socrates, and by some modern biographies, above all by condorcet's vie de m. turgot, a book well calculated to rouse the best sort of enthusiasm because it contains one of the wisest and noblest of lives depicted by one of the wisest and noblest of men. the heroic virtue of these glorious representatives of the opinions with which i sympathised deeply affected me, and i perpetually recurred to them as others do to a favourite poet when needing to be carried up into the more elevated regions of feeling and thought. i may observe by the way that this book cured me of my sectarian follies. the two or three pages beginning il regardait toute secte comme nuisible , and explaining why turgot always kept himself perfectly distinct from the encyclopedists, sank deeply into my mind. i left off designating myself and others as utilitarians, and stopped exhibiting sectarianism by the pronoun we or any other collective designation. my real inward sectarianism i did not get rid of till later, and much more gradually.

about the end of 1824, or beginning of 1825, mr. bentham, having lately got back his papers on evidence from m. dumont (whose traite des preuves judiciaires, grounded on them, was then first completed and published), resolved to have them printed in the original, and bethought himself of me as capable of preparing them for the press; in the same manner as his book of fallacies had been recently edited by bingham. i gladly undertook this task, and it occupied nearly all my leisure for about a year, exclusive of the time afterwards spent in seeing the five large volumes through the press. mr. bentham had begun this treatise three time's, at considerable intervals, each time in a different manner, and each time without reference to the preceding: two of the three times he had gone over nearly the whole subject. these three masses of manuscript it was my business to condense into a single treatise, adopting the one last written as the groundwork, and incorporating with it as much of the two others as it had not completely superseded. i had also to unroll such of bentham's involved and parenthetical sentences as seemed to overpass by their complexity the measure of what readers were likely to take the pains to understand. it was further mr. bentham's particular desire that i should, from myself, endeavour to supply any lacunae which he had left; and at his instance i read, for this purpose, the most authoritative treatises on the english law of evidence, and commented on a few of the objectionable points of the english rules, which had escaped bentham's notice. i also replied to the objections which had been made to some of his doctrines by reviewers of dumont's book, and added a few supplementary remarks on some of the more abstract parts of the subject, such as the theory of improbability and impossibility. the controversial part of these editorial additions was written in a more assuming tone than became one so young and inexperienced as i was: but indeed i had never contemplated coming forward in my own person; and as an anonymous editor of bentham i fell into the tone of my author, not thinking it unsuitable to him or to the subject, however it might be so to me. my name as editor was put to the book after it was printed, at mr. bentham's positive desire, which i in vain attempted to persuade him to forego.
preparing the rationale of judicial evidence about the end of 1824 or beginning of 1825, mr bentham, having recently got back his papers on evidence from m. dumont (whose traite des preuves judiciaires, based on them, had just been completed and published), decided to have them printed in the original language, and thought of me as capable of preparing them for the press; just as his book of fallacies had recently been edited by bingham. i gladly undertook this task, and it occupied nearly all my spare time for about a year, and then there was the time afterwards spent in seeing the five large volumes through the press. mr bentham had begun this treatise three times, at considerable intervals, each time in a different manner and without reference to what had gone before. two of the three times he had gone over nearly the whole subject. it was my business to condense these three masses of manuscript into a single treatise; adopting the third as the groundwork, and incorporating with it as much of the other two as it had not completely superseded. i had also to unroll such of bentham's involved and parenthetical sentences as seemed too complex for readers to be likely to take the trouble to understand. mr bentham also wanted me to try by my own efforts to fill any gaps he had left; and for this purpose i read the most authoritative treatises on the english law of evidence, and commented on a few of the objectionable features of the english rules that had escaped bentham's notice. i also replied to the objections to some of his doctrines that had been made by reviewers of dumont's book, and added a few supplementary remarks on some of the more abstract parts of the subject, such as the theory of improbability and impossibility. the controversial part of these editorial additions was written in a more arrogant tone than was becoming in one so young and inexperienced as i was; but indeed i had never contemplated coming forward in my own person; and as an anonymous editor of bentham i fell into the tone of my author, not thinking it unsuitable to him or to the subject, however unsuitable it might be to me. my name as editor was put to the book after it was printed, at mr bentham's positive desire, which i tried and failed to persuade him to forgo.

the time occupied in this editorial work was extremely well employed in respect to my own improvement. the rationale of judicial evidence is one of the richest in matter of all bentham's productions. the theory of evidence being in itself one of the most important of his subjects, and ramifying into most of the others, the book contains, very fully developed, a great proportion of all his best thoughts: while, among more special things, it comprises the most elaborate exposure of the vices and defects of english law, as it then was, which is to be found in his works; not confined to the law of evidence, but including, by way of illustrative episode, the entire procedure or practice of westminster hall. the direct knowledge, therefore, which i obtained from the book, and which was imprinted upon me much more thoroughly than it could have been by mere reading, was itself no small acquisition. but this occupation did for me what might seem less to be expected; it gave a great start to my powers of composition. everything which i wrote subsequently to this editorial employment, was markedly superior to anything that i had written before it. bentham's later style, as the world knows, was heavy and cumbersome, from the excess of a good quality, the love of precision, which made him introduce clause within clause into the heart of every sentence, that the reader might receive into his mind all the modifications and qualifications simultaneously with the main proposition: and the habit grew on him until his sentences became, to those not accustomed to them, most laborious reading. but his earlier style, that of the fragment on government, plan of a judicial establishment, etc., is a model of liveliness and ease combined with fulness of matter, scarcely ever surpassed: and of this earlier style there were many striking specimens in the manuscripts on evidence, all of which i endeavoured to preserve. so long a course of this admirable writing had a considerable effect upon my own; and i added to it by the assiduous reading of other writers, both french and english, who combined, in a remarkable degree, ease with force, such as goldsmith, fielding, pascal, voltaire, and courier. through these influences my writing lost the jejuneness of my early compositions; the bones and cartilages began to clothe themselves with flesh, and the style became, at times, lively and almost light.
so far as my own improvement was concerned, the time occupied in this editorial work was extremely well spent. the rationale of judicial evidence is one of the richest in matter of all bentham's productions. the theory of evidence being in itself one of the most important of his subjects and ramifying into most of the others, the book contains a great proportion of all his best thoughts, very fully developed; while also including the most elaborate exposure of the vices and defects of english law (as it then was) that is to be found in his works. so the direct knowledge i obtained from the book, imprinted on me much more thoroughly than it could have been by mere reading, was itself no small acquisition. but this occupation also did for me something that might seem less to be expected, namely giving a great start to my powers of composition. everything i wrote after this editorial employment was markedly superior to anything i had written before it. bentham's later style, as the world knows, was heavy and cumbersome, from the excess of a good quality, the love of precision, which made him introduce clause within clause into the heart of every sentence, so that the reader might receive into his mind all the modifications and qualifications along with the main proposition; and the habit grew on him until his sentences became most laborious reading for those not accustomed to them. but his earlier style, that of the fragment on government, plan of a judicial establishment etc. is a model of liveliness and ease combined with fulness of matter, scarcely ever surpassed: and there were many striking specimens of this earlier style in the manuscripts for evidence, all of which i tried to preserve. such a long course of this admirable writing had a considerable effect on my own; and i added to it by the assiduous reading of other writers, both french and english, who combined ease with force, such as goldsmith, fielding, pascal, voltaire, and courier. through these influences my writing lost the jejuneness of my early works; the bones and cartilages began to clothe themselves with flesh, and the style became sometimes lively and almost light.

this improvement was first exhibited in a new field. mr. marshall, of leeds, father of the present generation of marshalls, the same who was brought into parliament for yorkshire, when the representation forfeited by grampound was transferred to it, an earnest parliamentary reformer, and a man of large fortune, of which he made a liberal use, had been much struck with bentham's book of fallacies; and the thought had occurred to him that it would be useful to publish annually the parliamentary debates, not in the chronological order of hansard, but classified according to subjects, and accompanied by a commentary pointing out the fallacies of the speakers. with this intention, he very naturally addressed himself to the editor of the book of fallacies; and bingham, with the assistance of charles austin, undertook the editorship. the work was called parliamentary history and review. its sale was not sufficient to keep it in existence, and it only lasted three years. it excited, however, some attention among parliamentary and political people. the best strength of the party was put forth in it; and its execution did them much more credit than that of the westminster review had ever done. bingham and charles austin wrote much in it; as did strutt, romilly, and several other liberal lawyers. my father wrote one article in his best style; the elder austin another. coulson wrote one of great merit. it fell to my lot to lead off the first number by an article on the principal topic of the session (that of 1825), the catholic association and the catholic disabilities. in the second number i wrote an elaborate essay on the commercial crisis of 1825 and the currency debates. in the third i had two articles, one on a minor subject, the other on the reciprocity principle in commerce, a propos of a celebrated diplomatic correspondence between canning and gallatin. these writings were no longer mere reproductions and applications of the doctrines i had been taught; they were original thinking, as far as that name can be applied to old ideas in new forms and connexions: and i do not exceed the truth in saying that there was a maturity, and a well-digested, character about them, which there had not been in any of my previous performances. in execution, therefore, they were not at all juvenile; but their subjects have either gone by, or have been so much better treated since, that they are entirely superseded, and should remain buried in the same oblivion with my contributions to the first dynasty of the westminster review.
this improvement was first exhibited in a new field. mr marshall of leeds the father of the present generation of marshalls, the same who was brought into parliament for yorkshire when the representation forfeited by grampound because of corruption was transferred to it, an earnest parliamentary reformer and a man of large fortune of which he made a liberal use, had been much struck with bentham's book of fallacies; and he thought it would be useful to publish annually the parliamentary debates, not in the chronological order of hansard but classified according to subjects, and accompanied by a commentary pointing out the speakers fallacies. with this intention he naturally addressed himself to the editor of the book of fallacies; and bingham, with the assistance of charles austin, undertook the editorship. the work was called parliamentary history and review. its sale was not sufficient to keep it in existence, and it only lasted three years; but it aroused some attention among parliamentary and political people. the best strength of the party was put forth in it; and its execution did them much more credit than that of the westminster review had ever done. bingham and charles austin wrote much in it; as did strutt, romilly, and several other liberal lawyers. my father wrote one article in his best style; the elder austin another. coulson wrote one of great merit. it fell to me to lead off the first number with an article on the principal topic of the session (that of 1825), the catholic association and the catholic disabilities. in the second number i wrote an elaborate essay on the commercial crisis of 1825 and the currency debates. in the third i had two articles, one on a minor subject, the other on the reciprocity principle in commerce, apropos of a celebrated diplomatic correspondence between canning and gallatin. these writings were no longer mere reproductions and applications of the doctrines i had been taught; they were original thinking, as far as original can be applied to old ideas in new forms and connections; and i can truthfully say that they had a maturity and a well-digested character that none of my previous performances had had. so they were not at all juvenile in execution; but their subjects have either gone by or have been so much better treated since that they are entirely superseded, and should remain buried in the same oblivion with my contributions to the first dynasty of the westminster review.

while thus engaged in writing for the public, i did not neglect other modes of self-cultivation. it was at this time that i learnt german; beginning it on the hamiltonian method, for which purpose i and several of my companions formed a class. for several years from this period, our social studies assumed a shape which contributed very much to my mental progress. the idea occurred to us of carrying on, by reading and conversation, a joint study of several of the branches of science which we wished to be masters of. we assembled to the number of a dozen or more. mr. grote lent a room of his house in threadneedle street for the purpose, and his partner, prescott, one of the three original members of the utilitarian society, made one among us. we met two mornings in every week, from half-past eight till ten, at which hour most of us were called off to our daily occupations. our first subject was political economy. we chose some systematic treatise as our text-book; my father's elements being our first choice. one of us read aloud a chapter, or some smaller portion of the book. the discussion was then opened, and anyone who had an objection, or other remark to make, made it. our rule was to discuss thoroughly every point raised, whether great or small, prolonging the discussion until all who took part were satisfied with the conclusion they had individually arrived at; and to follow up every topic of collateral speculation which the chapter or the conversation suggested, never leaving it until we had untied every knot which we found. we repeatedly kept up the discussion of some one point for several weeks, thinking intently on it during the intervals of our meetings, and contriving solutions of the new difficulties which had risen up in the last morning's discussion. when we had finished in this way my father's elements, we went in the same manner through ricardo's principles of political economy, and bailey's dissertation on value. these close and vigorous discussions were not only improving in a high degree to those who took part in them, but brought out new views of some topics of abstract political economy. the theory of international values which i afterwards published, emanated from these conversations, as did also the modified form of ricardo's theory of profits, laid down in my essay on profits and interest. those among us with whom new speculations chiefly originated, were ellis, graham, and i; though others gave valuable aid to the discussions, especially prescott and roebuck, the one by his knowledge, the other by his dialectical acuteness. the theories of international values and of profits were excogitated and worked out in about equal proportions by myself and graham: and if our original project had been executed, my essays on some unsettled questions of political economy would have been brought out along with some papers of his, under our joint names. but when my exposition came to be written, i found that i had so much over-estimated my agreement with him, and he dissented so much from the most original of the two essays, that on international values, that i was obliged to consider the theory as now exclusively mine, and it came out as such when published many years later. i may mention that among the alterations which my father made in revising his elements for the third edition, several were founded on criticisms elicited by these conversations; and in particular he modified his opinions (though not to the extent of our new speculations) on both the points to which i have adverted.
while thus engaged in writing for the public, i did not neglect other modes of self-cultivation. it was at this time that i learned german; beginning it on the hamiltonian method focusing on translation, ignoring grammar-for which purpose i and several of my companions formed a class. for several years from this period, our social studies took a form that contributed greatly to my mental progress. the idea occurred to us of carrying on, by reading and conversation, a joint study of several of the branches of science we wanted to be masters of. we assembled to the number of a dozen or more. mr grote lent a room of his house in threadneedle street for the purpose, and his partner prescott one of the three original members of the utilitarian society made one of our number. we met two mornings in every week, from 8.30 till 10, at which hour most of us were called off to our daily occupations. our first subject was political economy. we chose some systematic treatise as our text-book, my father's elements being our first choice. one of us read aloud a chapter or some smaller portion of the book. the discussion was then opened, and anyone who had an objection or other remark to make made it. our rule was to discuss thoroughly every point raised, whether great or small, prolonging the discussion until all who took part were satisfied with the conclusion they had individually arrived at; and to follow up every side-issue that the chapter or the conversation suggested, never leaving it until we had untied every knot we found. we repeatedly kept up the discussion of some one point for several weeks, thinking intently on it during the intervals of our meetings, and contriving solutions of the new difficulties that had arisen in the last morning's discussion. when we had finished in this way my father's elements, we went in the same manner through ricardo's principles of political economy and bailey's dissertation on value. these close and vigorous discussions were not only highly improving for those who took part in them but brought out new views of some topics in abstract political economy. the theory of international values that i afterwards published came from these conversations, as did also the modified form of ricardo's theory of profits laid down in my essay on profits and interest. new theorisings from us mainly originated with ellis, graham, and myself; though others gave valuable aid to the discussions, especially prescott (by his knowledge) and roebuck (by his dialectical acuteness). the theories of international values and of profits were thought up and worked out in about equal proportions by myself and graham; and if our original project had been carried out my essays on some unsettled questions of political economy would have been published along with some papers of his under our joint names. but when my exposition came to be written, i found that i had so much over-estimated my agreement with him, and he dissented so much from the most original of the two essays the one on international values that i had to consider the theory as now exclusively mine, and it came out as such when published many years later. i may mention that among the alterations my father made in revising his elements for the third edition, several were based on criticisms arising from these conversations; and in particular he modified his opinions (though not to the extent of our new theories) on both the points i have mentioned.

when we had enough of political economy, we took up the syllogistic logic in the same manner, grote now joining us. our first text-book was aldrich, but being disgusted with its superficiality, we reprinted one of the most finished among the many manuals of the school logic, which my father, a great collector of such books, possessed, the manuductio ad logicam of the jesuit du trieu. after finishing this, we took up whately's logic, then first republished from the encyclopedia metropolitana, and finally the computatio sive logica of hobbes. these books, dealt with in our manner, afforded a high range for original metaphysical speculation: and most of what has been done in the first book of my system of logic, to rationalize and correct the principles and distinctions of the school logicians, and to improve the theory of the import of propositions, had its origin in these discussions; graham and i originating most of the novelties, while grote and others furnished an excellent tribunal or test. from this time i formed the project of writing a book on logic, though on a much humbler scale than the one i ultimately executed.
when we had enough of political economy, we took up syllogistic logic in the same manner, grote now joining us. our first text-book was aldrich, but being disgusted with its superficiality we reprinted the manuductio ad logicam of the jesuit du trieu, one of the most finished among the many manuals of scholastic logic that my father, a great collector of such books, possessed. after finishing this we took up whately's logic and finally the computatio sive logica of hobbes. when dealt with in our manner, these books provided a wide range for original metaphysical speculation; and most of what has been done in book i of my system of logic to rationalise and correct the principles and distinctions of the scholastic logicians, and to improve the theory of the import of propositions, had its origin in these discussions; graham and i originating most of the novelties while grote and others served as an excellent tribunal or test. from this time i formed the project of writing a book on logic, though on a much humbler scale than the one i eventually wrote.

having done with logic, we launched into analytic psychology, and having chosen hartley for our text-book, we raised priestley's edition to an extravagant price by searching through london to furnish each of us with a copy. when we had finished hartley, we suspended our meetings; but my father's analysis of the mind being published soon after, we reassembled for the purpose of reading it. with this our exercises ended. i have always dated from these conversations my own real inauguration as an original and independent thinker. it was also through them that i acquired, or very much strengthened, a mental habit to which i attribute all that i have ever done, or ever shall do, in speculation: that of never accepting half-solutions of difficulties as complete; never abandoning a puzzle, but again and again returning to it until it was cleared up; never allowing obscure corners of a subject to remain unexplored, because they did not appear important; never thinking that i perfectly understood any part of a subject until i understood the whole.
having done with logic, we launched into analytic psychology, and having chosen hartley's observations on man for our text-book we raised priestley's edition of it to an extravagant price by searching through london to furnish each of us with a copy. when we had finished hartley, we suspended our meetings; but when my father's analysis of the mind was published soon after, we reassembled for the purpose of reading it. with this our exercises ended. i have always dated from these conversations my own real inauguration as an original and independent thinker. it was also through them that i acquired, or very much strengthened, a mental habit to which i attribute all that i ever did or ever shall do in theoretical matters, namely never accepting half-solutions of difficulties as complete, never abandoning a puzzle, but returning to it again and again until it was cleared up, never allowing obscure corners of a subject to remain unexplored because they did not appear important, never thinking that i perfectly understood any part of a subject until i understood the whole.

our doings from 1825 to 1830 in the way of public speaking, filled a considerable place in my life during those years, and as they had important effects on my development, something ought to be said of them.
our doings from 1825 to 1830 in the way of public speaking filled a considerable place in my life during those years, and as they had important effects on my development i ought to say something about them.

there was for some time in existence a society of owenites, called the co-operative society, which met for weekly public discussions in chancery lane. in the early part of 1825, accident brought roebuck in contact with several of its members, and led to his attending one or two of the meetings and taking part in the debate in opposition to owenism. some one of us started the notion of going there in a body and having a general battle: and charles austin and some of his friends who did not usually take part in our joint exercises, entered into the project. it was carried out by concert with the principal members of the society, themselves nothing loth, as they naturally preferred a controversy with opponents to a tame discussion among their own body. the question of population was proposed as the subject of debate: charles austin led the case on our side with a brilliant speech, and the fight was kept up by adjournment through five or six weekly meetings before crowded auditories, including along with the members of the society and their friends, many hearers and some speakers from the inns of court. when this debate was ended, another was commenced on the general merits of owen's system: and the contest altogether lasted about three months. it was a lutte corps a corps between owenites and political economists, whom the owenites regarded as their most inveterate opponents: but it was a perfectly friendly dispute. we who represented political economy, had the same objects in view as they had, and took pains to show it; and the principal champion on their side was a very estimable man, with whom i was well acquainted, mr. william thompson, of cork, author of a book on the distribution of wealth, and of an appeal in behalf of women against the passage relating to them in my father's essay on government. ellis, roebuck, and i took an active part in the debate, and among those from the inns of court who joined in it, i remember charles villiers. the other side obtained also, on the population question, very efficient support from without. the well-known gale jones, then an elderly man, made one of his florid speeches; but the speaker with whom i was most struck, though i dissented from nearly every word he said, was thirlwall, the historian, since bishop of st. david's, then a chancery barrister, unknown except by a high reputation for eloquence acquired at the cambridge union before the era of austin and macaulay. his speech was in answer to one of mine. before he had uttered ten sentences, i set him down as the best speaker i had ever heard, and i have never since heard anyone whom i placed above him.
there was for some time a society of owenites called the co-operative society, which met for weekly public discussions in chancery lane. roebuck happened to be in contact with several of its members early in 1825, and attended one or two of the meetings and joined in the debate in opposition to owenism. some of us started the notion of going there in a body and having a general battle; and charles austin and some of his friends who did not usually take part in our joint exercises entered into the project. it was carried out in collaboration with the principal members of the society, who naturally preferred a controversy with opponents to a tame discussion among their own members. the question of population was proposed as the subject of debate: charles austin led the case on our side with a brilliant speech, and the fight was kept up by adjournment through five or six weekly meetings before crowded audiences including along with the members of the society and their friends many hearers and some speakers from the legal profession. when this debate was ended, another was started on the general merits of owen's system; and the contest altogether lasted about three months. it was a lutte corps-a-corps between owenites and political economists, whom the owenites regarded as their most inveterate opponents; but it was a perfectly friendly dispute. we who represented political economy had the same objectives as they had, and took trouble to show it; and the principal champion on their side was a very estimable man with whom i was well acquainted, mr william thompson of cork, author of a book on the distribution of wealth, and of an appeal on behalf of women against the passage relating to them in my father's essay on government. ellis, roebuck, and i took an active part in the debate, and among those from the legal profession who joined in it i remember charles villiers. on the population question the other side also obtained very efficient support from outside. the well-known gale jones, then an elderly man, made one of his florid speeches; but the speaker who struck me most, though i dissented from nearly every word he said, was the historian thirlwall, since bishop of st. david's, then a chancery barrister, unknown except by a high reputation for eloquence acquired at the cambridge union before the era of austin and macaulay. his speech was in answer to one of mine. before he had uttered ten sentences i rated him as the best speaker i had ever heard, and i have never heard anyone whom i placed above him.

the great interest of these debates predisposed some of those who took part in them, to catch at a suggestion thrown out by mcculloch, the political economist, that a society was wanted in london similar to the speculative society at edinburgh, in which brougham, horner, and others first cultivated public speaking. our experience at the co-operative society seemed to give cause for being sanguine as to the sort of men who might be brought together in london for such a purpose. mcculloch mentioned the matter to several young men of influence, to whom he was then giving private lessons in political economy. some of these entered warmly into the project, particularly george villiers, after earl of clarendon. he and his brothers, hyde and charles, romilly, charles austin and i, with some others, met and agreed on a plan. we determined to meet once a fortnight from november to june, at the freemasons tavern, and we had soon a fine list of members, containing, along with several members of parliament, nearly all the most noted speakers of the cambridge union and of the oxford united debating society. it is curiously illustrative of the tendencies of the time, that our principal difficulty in recruiting for the society was to find a sufficient number of tory speakers. almost all whom we could press into the service were liberals, of different orders and degrees. besides those already named, we had macaulay, thirlwall, praed, lord howick, samuel wilberforce (afterwards bishop of oxford), charles poulett thomson (afterwards lord sydenham), edward and henry lytton bulwer, fonblanque, and many others whom i cannot now recollect, but who made themselves afterwards more or less conspicuous in public or literary life. nothing could seem more promising. but when the time for action drew near, and it was necessary to fix on a president, and find somebody to open the first debate, none of our celebrities would consent to perform either office. of the many who were pressed on the subject, the only one who could be prevailed on was a man of whom i knew very little, but who had taken high honours at oxford and was said to have acquired a great oratorical reputation there; who some time afterwards became a tory member of parliament. he accordingly was fixed on, both for filling the president's chair and for making the first speech. the important day arrived; the benches were crowded; all our great speakers were present, to judge of, but not to help our efforts. the oxford orator's speech was a complete failure. this threw a damp on the whole concern: the speakers who followed were few, and none of them did their best: the affair was a complete fiasco; and the oratorical celebrities we had counted on went away never to return, giving to me at least a lesson in knowledge of the world. this unexpected breakdown altered my whole relation to the project. i had not anticipated taking a prominent part, or speaking much or often, particularly at first, but i now saw that the success of the scheme depended on the new men, and i put my shoulder to the wheel. i opened the second question, and from that time spoke in nearly every debate. it was very uphill work for some time. the three villiers and romilly stuck to us for some time longer, but the patience of all the founders of the society was at last exhausted, except me and roebuck. in the season following, 1826-7, things began to mend. we had acquired two excellent tory speakers, hayward and shee (afterwards sergeant shee): the radical side was reinforced by charles buller, cockburn, and others of the second generation of cambridge benthamities; and with their and other occasional aid, and the two tories as well as roebuck and me for regular speakers, almost every debate was a bataille rangee between the philosophic radicals and the tory lawyers; until our conflicts were talked about, and several persons of note and consideration came to hear us. this happened still more in the subsequent seasons, 1828 and 1829, when the coleridgians, in the persons of maurice and sterling, made their appearance in the society as a second liberal and even radical party, on totally different grounds from benthamism and vehemently opposed to it; bringing into these discussions the general doctrines and modes of thought of the european reaction against the philosophy of the eighteenth century; and adding a third and very important belligerent party to our contests, which were now no bad exponent of the movement of opinion among the most cultivated part of the new generation. our debates were very different from those of common debating societies, for they habitually consisted of the strongest arguments and most philosophic principles which either side was able to produce, thrown often into close and serre confutations of one another. the practice was necessarily very useful to us, and eminently so to me. i never, indeed, acquired real fluency, and had always a bad and ungraceful delivery; but i could make myself listened to: and as i always wrote my speeches when, from the feelings involved, or the nature of the ideas to be developed, expression seemed important, i greatly increased my power of effective writing; acquiring not only an ear for smoothness and rhythm, but a practical sense for telling sentences, and an immediate criterion of their telling property, by their effect on a mixed audience.
the great interest of these debates predisposed some of those who took part in them to take up a suggestion thrown out by the political economist mcculloch that a society was wanted in london similar to the speculative society at edinburgh, in which brougham, horner, and others first cultivated public speaking. our experience at the co-operative society seemed to give cause for optimism about the sort of men who might be brought together in london for such a purpose. mcculloch mentioned the matter to several young men of influence to whom he was then giving private lessons in political economy. some of these entered warmly into the project, particularly george villiers (afterwards earl of clarendon). he and his brothers hyde and charles, romilly, charles austin and i, with some others, met and agreed on a plan. we determined to meet once a fortnight from november to june, at the freemasons tavern, and we had soon a splendid list of members, containing several members of parliament and nearly all the most noted speakers of the cambridge union and of the oxford united debating society. it is curiously illustrative of the tendencies of the time that our main difficulty in recruiting for the society was to find enough tory speakers. almost all the people we could press into the service were liberals of different orders and degrees. besides those already named, we had macaulay, thirlwall, praed, lord howick, samuel wilberforce (afterwards bishop of oxford), charles poulett thomson (afterwards lord sydenham), edward and henry lytton bulwer, fonblanque, and many others whom i cannot now recollect but who later made themselves more or less conspicuous in public or literary life. nothing could seem more promising. but when the time for action drew near and we had to choose a president and find someone to open the first debate, none of our celebrities would consent to perform either office. of the many who were pressed on the subject the only one who could be prevailed on was a man of whom i knew very little, but who had taken high honours at oxford and was said to have acquired a great oratorical reputation there; who some time later became a tory member of parliament. he accordingly was fixed on, both for filling the president's chair and for making the first speech. the important day arrived; the benches were crowded; all our great speakers were present, to judge our efforts but not to help them. the oxford orator's speech was a complete failure. this threw a damp on the whole concern: the speakers who followed were few, and none of them did their best. the affair was a complete fiasco, and the oratorical celebrities we had counted on went away never to return, giving to me at least a lesson in knowledge of the world. this unexpected breakdown altered my whole relation to the project. i had not expected to take a prominent part or to speak much or often, particularly at first, but i now saw that the success of the scheme depended on the new men, and i put my shoulder to the wheel. i opened the second question, and from that time spoke in nearly every debate. it was very uphill work for some time. the three villiers and romilly stuck to us for some time longer, but the patience of all the founders of the society was at last exhausted, except for myself and roebuck. in the following season (1826-7) things began to mend. we had acquired two excellent tory speakers, hayward and shee (afterwards sergeant shee); the radical side was reinforced by charles buller, cockburn, and others of the second generation of cambridge benthamites; and with their help and occasional help from others, and with the two tories as well as roebuck and me as regular speakers, almost every debate was a bataille rangee between the philosophic radicals and the tory lawyers; until our conflicts were talked about, and several notable and considerable persons came to hear us. this happened still more in the subsequent seasons (1828 and 1829) when the coleridgians, in the persons of maurice and sterling, made their appearance in the society as a second liberal and even radical party, on totally different grounds from benthamism and vehemently opposed to it; bringing into these discussions the general doctrines and modes of thought of the european reaction against the philosophy of the eighteenth century; and adding a third and very important belligerent party to our contests, which were now a pretty good display of the movement of opinion among the most cultivated part of the new generation. our debates were very different from those of common debating societies, for they habitually consisted of the strongest arguments and most philosophical principles that either side could produce, often thrown into close confutations of one another. the practice was necessarily very useful to us, especially to me. i never acquired real fluency, and always had a bad and ungraceful delivery, but i could make myself listened to. also, whenever expression seemed important for a given speech from the feelings involved, or the nature of the ideas to be developed i wrote the speech in advance; so i greatly increased my power of effective writing, acquiring not only an ear for smoothness and rhythm but a practical sense for effective sentences and an immediate criterion of their effectiveness by their effect on a mixed audience.

under his management. accordingly my father excused himself from writing; though two or three years later, on great pressure, he did write one more political article. as for me, i positively refused. and thus ended my connexion with the original westminster. the last article which i wrote in it had cost me more labour than any previous; but it was a labour of love, being a defence of the early french revolutionists against the tory misrepresentations of sir walter scott, in the introduction to his life of napoleon. the number of books which i read for this purpose, making notes and extracts even the number i had to buy (for in those days there was no public or subscription library from which books of reference could be taken home) far exceeded the worth of the immediate object; but i had at that time a half-formed intention of writing a history of the french revolution; and though i never executed it, my collections afterwards were very useful to carlyle for a similar purpose.
the society, and the preparation for it, together with the preparation for the morning conversations that were going on at the same time, took up most of my spare time and made me feel it a relief when (in the spring of 1828) i stopped writing for the westminster review. this had fallen into difficulties. though the sale of the first number had been very encouraging, i don't think the permanent sale was ever enough to pay the expenses on the scale on which the review was carried on. those expenses had been considerably reduced, but not enough. one of the editors, southern, had resigned; and several of the writers, including my father and me, who had been paid like other contributors for our earlier articles, had recently written without payment. nevertheless, the original funds were nearly or quite exhausted, and if the review was to be continued there had to be some new arrangement of its affairs. my father and i had several conferences with bowring on the subject. we were willing to do our utmost for maintaining the review as an organ of our opinions, but not under bowring's editorship; while the impossibility of its any longer supporting a paid editor provided a basis on which we could without offence to him propose to dispense with his services. we and some of our friends were prepared to carry on the review as unpaid writers, either finding among ourselves an unpaid editor or sharing the editorship among us. but while this negotiation was proceeding with bowring's apparent acceptance, he was carrying on another negotiation in a different quarter (with colonel perronet thompson). the first we heard of it was in a letter from bowring as editor, informing us merely that an arrangement had been made, and proposing to us to write for the next number with promise of payment. we did not dispute bowring's right to bring about, if he could, an arrangement more favourable to himself than the one we had proposed; but we thought his concealing it from us while seemingly entering into our own project was an insult; and even had we not thought so, we were not inclined to spend any more time and trouble attempting to preserve the review under his management. so my father excused himself from writing, though two or three years later he was pressured into writing one more political article. as for me, i positively refused. and thus ended my connection with the original westminster review. the last article i wrote in it had taken more work than any previous one; but it was a labour of love, being a defence of the early french revolutionists against the tory misrepresentations of sir walter scott in the introduction to his life of napoleon. the number of books i read for this purpose, making notes and extracts even the number i had to buy (for in those days there was no public or subscription library from which books of reference could be taken home) far exceeded the worth of the immediate purpose; but i had at that time a half-formed intention of writing a history of the french revolution; and though i never wrote it, my collections afterwards were very useful to carlyle for a similar purpose.

chapter v
notes

crisis in my mental history. one stage onward
part 5: a crisis in my mental history. one stage onward

for some years after this time i wrote very little, and nothing regularly, for publication: and great were the advantages which i derived from the intermission. it was of no common importance to me, at this period, to be able to digest and mature my thoughts for my own mind only, without any immediate call for giving them out in print. had i gone on writing, it would have much disturbed the important transformation in my opinions and character, which took place during those years. the origin of this transformation, or at least the process by which i was prepared for it, can only be explained by turning some distance back.
for some years after this i wrote very little for publication, and nothing regularly; and i got great advantages from this intermission. it was of considerable importance to me at this period to be able to digest and mature my thoughts for my own mind only, without any immediate call for giving them out in print. if i had gone on writing, that would have disturbed the important transformation in my opinions and character that occurred during those years. the origin of this transformation, or at least the process by which i was prepared for it, can only be explained by turning some distance back. crucial question, disturbing answer

from the winter of 1821, when i first read bentham, and especially from the commencement of the westminster review, i had what might truly be called an object in life; to be a reformer of the world. my conception of my own happiness was entirely identified with this object. the personal sympathies i wished for were those of fellow labourers in this enterprise. i endeavoured to pick up as many flowers as i could by the way; but as a serious and permanent personal satisfaction to rest upon, my whole reliance was placed on this; and i was accustomed to felicitate myself on the certainty of a happy life which i enjoyed, through placing my happiness in something durable and distant, in which some progress might be always making, while it could never be exhausted by complete attainment. this did very well for several years, during which the general improvement going on in the world and the idea of myself as engaged with others in struggling to promote it, seemed enough to fill up an interesting and animated existence. but the time came when i awakened from this as from a dream. it was in the autumn of 1826. i was in a dull state of nerves, such as everybody is occasionally liable to; unsusceptible to enjoyment or pleasurable excitement; one of those moods when what is pleasure at other times, becomes insipid or indifferent; the state, i should think, in which converts to methodism usually are, when smitten by their first conviction of sin. in this frame of mind it occurred to me to put the question directly to myself: suppose that all your objects in life were realized; that all the changes in institutions and opinions which you are looking forward to, could be completely effected at this very instant: would this be a great joy and happiness to you? and an irrepressible self-consciousness distinctly answered, no! at this my heart sank within me: the whole foundation on which my life was constructed fell down. all my happiness was to have been found in the continual pursuit of this end. the end had ceased to charm, and how could there ever again be any interest in the means? i seemed to have nothing left to live for.
from the winter of 1821 when i first read bentham, and especially from the start of the westminster review, i had what might truly be called an objective in life to be a reformer of the world. my conception of my own happiness was entirely identified with this objective. the personal sympathies i wished for were those of fellow labourers in this enterprise. i tried to pick up as many flowers as i could along the way; but this was all i relied on for serious and permanent personal satisfaction; and i often congratulated myself on how certain i could be of having a happy life by placing my happiness in something durable and distant something in which some progress might be always making while it could never be exhausted by complete attainment. this did very well for several years, during which the general improvement going on in the world and the idea of myself as engaged with others in struggling to promote it seemed enough to fill up an interesting and animated existence. but the time came when i awakened from this as from a dream. it was in the autumn of 1826 when i was 20 years old. i was in a dull state of nerves of the sort that everyone is occasionally liable to; incapable of enjoyment or pleasurable excitement; one of those moods when what is pleasure at other times becomes insipid or indifferent; the state (i should think) that converts to methodism are usually in when they are smitten by their first conviction of sin. in this frame of mind it occurred to me to put the question directly to myself: suppose that all your objectives in life were realised; that all the changes in institutions and opinions that you are looking forward to were completely effected at this very instant; would this be a great joy and happiness to you? and there was no way of blocking the clear answer no! at this my heart sank within me: the whole foundation on which my life was constructed fell down. all my happiness was to have been found in the continual pursuit of this end. the end had ceased to charm, so how could there ever again be any interest in the means? i seemed to have nothing left to live for.

at first i hoped that the cloud would pass away of itself; but it did not. a night's sleep, the sovereign remedy for the smaller vexations of life, had no effect on it. i awoke to a renewed consciousness of the woful fact. i carried it with me into all companies, into all occupations. hardly anything had power to cause me even a few minutes oblivion of it. for some months the cloud seemed to grow thicker and thicker. the lines in coleridge's dejection i was not then acquainted with them exactly describe my case:
the cloud lingers and thickens at first i hoped that the cloud would pass away of itself, but it did not. a night's sleep, the sovereign remedy for the smaller vexations of life, had no effect on it. i awoke to a renewed consciousness of the woeful fact. i carried it with me into all companies, into all occupations. hardly anything had power to cause me to forget it for even a few minutes. for some months the cloud seemed to grow thicker and thicker. the lines in coleridge's dejection i did not then know them exactly describe my case:

a grief without a pang, void, dark and drear, a drowsy, stifled, unimpassioned grief, which finds no natural outlet or relief in word, or sigh, or tear.
a grief without a pang, void, dark and drear,

in vain i sought relief from my favourite books; those memorials of past nobleness and greatness from which i had always hitherto drawn strength and animation. i read them now without feeling, or with the accustomed feeling minus all its charm; and i became persuaded, that my love of mankind, and of excellence for its own sake, had worn itself out. i sought no comfort by speaking to others of what i felt. if i had loved anyone sufficiently to make confiding my griefs a necessity, i should not have been in the condition i was. i felt, too, that mine was not an interesting, or in any way respectable distress. there was nothing in it to attract sympathy. advice, if i had known where to seek it, would have been most precious. the words of macbeth to the physician often occurred to my thoughts. but there was no one on whom i could build the faintest hope of such assistance. my father, to whom it would have been natural to me to have recourse in any practical difficulties, was the last person to whom, in such a case as this, i looked for help. everything convinced me that he had no knowledge of any such mental state as i was suffering from, and that even if he could be made to understand it, he was not the physician who could heal it. my education, which was wholly his work, had been conducted without any regard to the possibility of its ending in this result; and i saw no use in giving him the pain of thinking that his plans had failed, when the failure was probably irremediable, and, at all events, beyond the power of his remedies. of other friends, i had at that time none to whom i had any hope of making my condition intelligible. it was, however, abundantly intelligible to myself; and the more i dwelt upon it, the more hopeless it appeared.
which finds no natural outlet or relief in word, or sigh, or tear. in vain i sought relief from my favourite books, those memorials of past nobleness and greatness from which i had always drawn strength and animation. i read them now without feeling, or with the accustomed feeling minus all its charm, and i became convinced that my love of mankind and of excellence for its own sake had worn itself out. i did not seek comfort by speaking to others of what i felt. if i had loved anyone enough to make confiding my griefs a necessity, i would not have been in the condition i was. also, i felt that my distress was not interesting or in any way deserving of respect. there was nothing in it to attract sympathy. advice, if i had known where to seek it, would have been most precious. the words of macbeth to the physician often occurred to my thoughts. but there was no one on whom i could build the faintest hope of such assistance. it would have been natural for me to look to my father in any practical difficulties, but he was the last person to whom i would look for help in such a case as this. everything convinced me that he had no knowledge of any such mental state as i was suffering from, and that even if he could be made to understand it he was not the physician who could heal it. my education, which was wholly his work, had been conducted without any regard to the possibility of its ending in this result; and i saw no use in giving him the pain of thinking that his plans had failed, when the failure was probably irremediable and anyway beyond the power of his remedies. i had at that time no other friends to whom i had any hope of making my condition intelligible. it was however abundantly intelligible to myself, and the more i dwelt on it the more hopeless it appeared.

my course of study had led me to believe, that all mental and moral feelings and qualities, whether of a good or of a bad kind, were the results of association; that we love one thing, and hate another, take pleasure in one sort of action or contemplation, and pain in another sort, through the clinging of pleasurable or painful ideas to those things, from the effect of education or of experience. as a corollary from this, i had always heard it maintained by my father, and was myself convinced, that the object of education should be to form the strongest possible associations of the salutary class; associations of pleasure with all things beneficial to the great whole, and of pain with all things hurtful to it. this doctrine appeared inexpugnable; but it now seemed to me, on retrospect, that my teachers had occupied themselves but superficially with the means of forming and keeping up these salutary associations. they seemed to have trusted altogether to the old familiar instruments, praise and blame, reward and punishment. now, i did not doubt that by these means, begun early, and applied unremittingly, intense associations of pain and pleasure, especially of pain, might be created, and might produce desires and aversions capable of lasting undiminished to the end of life. but there must always be something artificial and casual in associations thus produced. the pains and pleasures thus forcibly associated with things, are not connected with them by any natural tie; and it is therefore, i thought, essential to the durability of these associations, that they should have become so intense and inveterate as to be practically indissoluble, before the habitual exercise of the power of analysis had commenced. for i now saw, or thought i saw, what i had always before received with incredulity that the habit of analysis has a tendency to wear away the feelings: as indeed it has, when no other mental habit is cultivated, and the analysing spirit remains without its natural complements and correctives. the very excellence of analysis (i argued) is that it tends to weaken and undermine whatever is the result of prejudice; that it enables us mentally to separate ideas which have only casually clung together: and no associations whatever could ultimately resist this dissolving force, were it not that we owe to analysis our clearest knowledge of the permanent sequences in nature; the real connexions between things, not dependent on our will and feelings; natural laws, by virtue of which, in many cases, one thing is inseparable from another in fact; which laws, in proportion as they are clearly perceived and imaginatively realized, cause our ideas of things which are always joined together in nature, to cohere more and more closely in our thoughts. analytic habits may thus even strengthen the associations between causes and effects, means and ends, but tend altogether to weaken those which are, to speak familiarly, a mere matter of feeling. they are therefore (i thought) favourable to prudence and clear- sightedness, but a perpetual worm at the root both of the passions and of the virtues; and, above all, fearfully undermine all desires, and all pleasures, which are the effects of association, that is, according to the theory i held, all except the purely physical and organic; of the entire insufficiency of which to make life desirable, no one had a stronger conviction than i had. these were the laws of human nature, by which, as it seemed to me, i had been brought to my present state. all those to whom i looked up, were of opinion that the pleasure of sympathy with human beings, and the feelings which made the good of others, and especially of mankind on a large scale, the object of existence, were the greatest and surest sources of happiness. of the truth of this i was convinced, but to know that a feeling would make me happy if i had it, did not give me the feeling. my education, i thought, had failed to create these feelings in sufficient strength to resist the dissolving influence of analysis, while the whole course of my intellectual cultivation had made precocious and premature analysis the inveterate habit of my mind. i was thus, as i said to myself, left stranded at the commencement of my voyage, with a well-equipped ship and a rudder, but no sail; without any real desire for the ends which i had been so carefully fitted out to work for: no delight in virtue, or the general good, but also just as little in anything else. the fountains of vanity and ambition seemed to have dried up within me, as completely as those of benevolence. i had had (as i reflected) some gratification of vanity at too early an age: i had obtained some distinction and felt myself of some importance, before the desire of distinction and of importance had grown into a passion: and little as it was which i had attained, yet having been attained too early, like all pleasures enjoyed too soon, it had made me blase and indifferent to the pursuit. thus neither selfish nor unselfish pleasures were pleasures to me. and there seemed no power in nature sufficient to begin the formation of my character anew, and create, in a mind now irretrievably analytic, fresh associations of pleasure with any of the objects of human desire.
my course of study had led me to believe that all mental and moral feelings and qualities, good or bad, were the results of association; that we love one thing and hate another, take pleasure in one sort of action or contemplation and pain in another sort, through the clinging of pleasurable or painful ideas to those things, from the effect of education or of experience. as a consequence of this i had always heard it maintained by my father, and was myself convinced, that the aim of education should be to form the strongest possible salutary associations of pleasure with all things beneficial to the great whole, and of pain with all things hurtful to it. this doctrine appeared to be unconquerable; but looking back it now seemed to me that my teachers views about how to form and maintain these salutary associations had been superficial. they seemed to have relied entirely on the old familiar instruments praise and blame, reward and punishment. now, i did not doubt that by these means, begun early and applied unremittingly, intense associations of pain and pleasure (especially pain) might be created, and might produce desires and aversions capable of lasting undiminished to the end of life. but there must always be something artificial and casual in associations thus produced. the pains and pleasures thus forcibly associated with things are not connected with them by any natural tie; and so (i thought) it is essential to the durability of these associations that they should become so intense and inveterate as to be practically indissoluble before the habitual exercise of the power of analysis had started. for i now saw, or thought i saw, what i had always before received with incredulity that the habit of analysis has a tendency to wear away the feelings. and so indeed it has, if no other mental habit is cultivated and the analysing spirit remains without its natural complements and correctives. the very excellence of analysis (i argued) is that it tends to weaken and undermine whatever is the result of prejudice; that it enables us mentally to separate ideas that have only casually clung together; and no associations could ultimately resist this dissolving force if it weren't that we owe to analysis our clearest knowledge of the permanent sequences in nature the real connections between things, not dependent on our will and feelings; natural laws by virtue of which in many cases one thing is inseparable from another in fact and not just in someone's mind; laws which, in proportion as they are clearly perceived and imaginatively realised, cause our ideas of things that are always joined together in nature to cohere more and more closely in our thoughts. analytic habits may thus even strengthen the associations between causes and effects, means and ends, but tend to weaken those that are, to speak familiarly, a mere matter of feeling. so they are (i thought) favourable to prudence and clear-sightedness but a perpetual worm at the root of the passions and of the virtues; and, above all, utterly undermine all desires and pleasures that are the effects of association, i.e. (according to the theory i held) all except the purely physical and organic and no-one had a stronger conviction than i had of the entire insufficiency of these to make life desirable. these were the laws of human nature by which (it seemed to me) i had been brought to my present state. all those i looked up to believed that the pleasure of sympathy with human beings, and the feelings that made the good of others, and especially of mankind on a large scale, the object of existence, were the greatest and surest sources of happiness. i was convinced of the truth of this, but to know that a feeling would make me happy if i had it did not give me the feeling. my education, i thought, had failed to create these feelings in sufficient strength to resist the dissolving influence of analysis, while the whole course of my intellectual cultivation had made precocious and premature analysis the unvarying habit of my mind. i was thus (as i said to myself) left stranded at the start of my voyage, with a well-equipped ship and a rudder but no sail, with no real desire for the ends i had been so carefully fitted out to work for, no delight in virtue or the general good, but also just as little delight in anything else. the fountains of vanity and ambition seemed to have dried up within me as completely as those of benevolence. i had had (as i reflected) some gratification of vanity at too early an age; i had obtained some distinction, and felt myself of some importance, before the desire for distinction and importance had grown into a passion; and what i had attained, though it wasn't much, had been attained too early and like all pleasures enjoyed too soon it had made me blase and indifferent to the pursuit. thus neither selfish nor unselfish pleasures were pleasures to me. and there seemed no power in nature sufficient to begin the formation of my character anew, and create in an irretrievably analytic mind fresh associations of pleasure with any objects of human desire.

these were the thoughts which mingled with the dry, heavy dejection of the melancholy winter of 1826-7. during this time i was not incapable of my usual occupations. i went on with them mechanically, by the mere force of habit. i had been so drilled in a certain sort of mental exercise, that i could still carry it on when all the spirit had gone out of it. i even composed and spoke several speeches at the debating society, how, or with what degree of success, i know not. of four years continual speaking at that society, this is the only year of which i remember next to nothing. two lines of coleridge, in whom alone of all writers i have found a true description of what i felt, were often in my thoughts, not at this time (for i had never read them), but in a later period of the same mental malady:
these were the thoughts that mingled with the dry heavy dejection of the melancholy winter of 1826-7. during this time i went on with my usual occupations mechanically, by the mere force of habit. i had been so drilled in a certain sort of mental exercise that i could still carry it on when all the spirit had gone out of it. i even composed and gave several speeches at the debating society i don't know how, or how successfully. out of four years of continual speaking at that society, this is the only year of which i remember next to nothing. two lines of coleridge, in whom alone of all writers i have found a true description of what i felt, were often in my thoughts, not at this time (for i had never read them), but in a later period of the same mental malady:

work without hope draws nectar in a sieve, and hope without an object cannot live.
work without hope draws nectar in a sieve, and hope without an object cannot live.

in all probability my case was by no means so peculiar as i fancied it, and i doubt not that many others have passed through a similar state; but the idiosyncrasies of my education had given to the general phenomenon a special character, which made it seem the natural effect of causes that it was hardly possible for time to remove. i frequently asked myself, if i could, or if i was bound to go on living, when life must be passed in this manner. i generally answered to myself that i did not think i could possibly bear it beyond a year. when, however, not more than half that duration of time had elapsed, a small ray of light broke in upon my gloom. i was reading, accidentally, marmontel's memoires, and came to the passage which relates his father's death, the distressed position of the family, and the sudden inspiration by which he, then a mere boy, felt and made them feel that he would be everything to them would supply the place of all that they had lost. a vivid conception of the scene and its feelings came over me, and i was moved to tears. from this moment my burden grew lighter. the oppression of the thought that all feeling was dead within me was gone. i was no longer hopeless: i was not a stock or a stone. i had still, it seemed, some of the material out of which all worth of character, and all capacity for happiness, are made. relieved from my ever-present sense of irremediable wretchedness, i gradually found that the ordinary incidents of life could again give me some pleasure; that i could again find enjoyment, not intense, but sufficient for cheerfulness, in sunshine and sky, in books, in conversation, in public affairs; and that there was, once more, excitement, though of a moderate, kind, in exerting myself for my opinions, and for the public good. thus the cloud gradually drew off, and i again enjoyed life; and though i had several relapses, some of which lasted many months, i never again was as miserable as i had been.
the cloud starts to lift after about half a year, however, a small ray of light broke in on my gloom. i happened to be reading marmontel's memoires, and came to the passage that relates his father's death, the distressed position of the family, and the sudden inspiration by which he (then a mere boy) felt and made them feel that he would be everything to them would make up for all they had lost. a vivid conception of the scene and its feelings came over me, and i was moved to tears. from this moment my burden grew lighter. the oppression of the thought that all feeling was dead within me was gone. i was no longer hopeless; i was not a stock or a stone. apparently i still had some of the material out of which all worth of character and all capacity for happiness are made. relieved from my ever-present sense of irremediable wretchedness, i gradually found that the ordinary incidents of life could again give me some pleasure; that i could again find enjoyment not intense, but sufficient for cheerfulness in sunshine and sky, in books, in conversation, in public affairs; and that there was again excitement, though of a moderate kind, in exerting myself for my opinions and for the public good. thus the cloud gradually drew off, and i again enjoyed life: and though i had several relapses, some lasting many months, i was never again as miserable as i had been in that winter.

the experiences of this period had two very marked effects on my opinions and character. in the first place, they led me to adopt a theory of life, very unlike that on which i had before i acted, and having much in common with what at that time i certainly had never heard of, the anti-self- consciousness theory of carlyle. i never, indeed, wavered in the conviction that happiness is the test of all rules of conduct, and the end of life. but i now thought that this end was only to be attained by not making it the direct end. those only are happy (i thought) who have their minds fixed on some object other than their own happiness; on the happiness of others, on the improvement of mankind, even on some art or pursuit, followed not as a means, but as itself an ideal end. aiming thus at something else, they find happiness by the way. the enjoyments of life (such was now my theory) are sufficient to make it a pleasant thing, when they are taken en passant, without being made a principal object. once make them so, and they are immediately felt to be insufficient. they will not bear a scrutinizing examination. ask yourself whether you are happy, and you cease to be so. the only chance is to treat, not happiness, but some end external to it, as the purpose of life. let your self-consciousness, your scrutiny, your self-interrogation, exhaust themselves on that; and if otherwise fortunately circumstanced you will inhale happiness with the air you breathe, without dwelling on it or thinking about it, without either forestalling it in imagination, or putting it to flight by fatal questioning. this theory now became the basis of my philosophy of life. and i still hold to it as the best theory for all those who have but a moderate degree of sensibility and of capacity i for enjoyment; that is, for the great majority of mankind. the other important change which my opinions at this time underwent, was that i, for the first time, gave its proper place, among the prime necessities of human well-being, to the internal culture of the individual. i ceased to attach almost exclusive importance to the ordering of outward circumstances, and the training of the human being for speculation and for action.
the experiences of this period had two very marked effects on my opinions and character. (1) they led me to adopt a theory of life very unlike the one i had acted on before, a theory with much in common with the anti-self-consciousness theory of carlyle (which at that time i had never heard of). i never wavered in my belief that happiness is the test of all rules of conduct and the goal of life. but i now thought that this goal was to be attained only by not making it the direct goal. the only happy people (i thought) are those whose minds are fixed on some objective other than their own happiness; on the happiness of others, on the improvement of mankind, even on some art or pursuit followed not as a means but as itself an ideal goal. aiming thus at something else, they find happiness along the way. the enjoyments of life (such was now my theory) are sufficient to make it a pleasant thing when they are taken en passant without being made a principal objective. once you make them so, you will immediately feel them to be insufficient. they will not bear a scrutinising examination. ask yourself whether you are happy, and you cease to be so. the only chance is for you to have as your purpose in life not happiness but something external to it. let your self-consciousness, your scrutiny, your self-interrogation, exhaust themselves on that; and if you are otherwise fortunately circumstanced you will inhale happiness with the air you breathe, without dwelling on it or thinking about it, forestalling it in imagination, or putting it to flight by fatal questioning. this theory now became the basis of my philosophy of life. i still hold to it as the best theory for all those who have only a moderate degree of sensibility and of capacity for enjoyment, i.e. for the great majority of mankind. (2) the other important change in my opinions was that for the first time i gave the internal culture of the individual its proper place among the prime necessities of human well-being. i ceased to attach almost exclusive importance to the ordering of outward circumstances, and the training of the human being for thought and for action.

i had now learnt by experience that the passing susceptibilities needed to be cultivated as well as the active capacities, and required to be nourished and enriched as well as guided. i did not, for an instant, lose sight of, or undervalue, that part of the truth which i had seen before; i never turned recreant to intellectual culture, or ceased to consider the power and practice of analysis as an essential condition both of individual and of social improvement but 1 thought that it had consequences which required to be corrected, by joining other kinds of cultivation with it. the maintenance of a due balance among the faculties now seemed to be of primary importance. the cultivation of the feelings became one of the cardinal points in my ethical and philosophical creed. and my thoughts and inclinations turned in an increasing degree towards whatever seemed capable of being instrumental to that object.
i had now learned by experience that the passive susceptibilities needed to be cultivated as well as the active capacities, and required to be nourished and enriched as well as guided. i did not for an instant lose sight of or undervalue the part of the truth i had seen before; i never broke faith with intellectual culture or ceased to consider the power and practice of analysis as an essential condition of individual and of social improvement. but i thought that it had consequences which required to be corrected by joining other kinds of cultivation with it. it now seemed to me of primary importance to maintain a proper balance among the faculties. the cultivation of the feelings became one of the chief themes in my ethical and philosophical creed. and my thoughts and inclinations turned increasingly towards whatever seemed capable of serving that objective.

i now began to find meaning in the things, which i had read or heard about the importance of poetry and art as instruments of human culture. but it was some time longer before i began to know this by personal experience. the only one of the imaginative arts in which i had from childhood taken great pleasure, was music; the best effect of which (and in this it surpasses perhaps every other art) consists in exciting enthusiasm; in winding up to a high pitch those feelings of an elevated kind which are already in the character, but to which this excitement gives a glow and a fervour, which, though transitory at its utmost height, is precious for sustaining them at other times. this effect of music i had often experienced; but, like all my pleasurable susceptibilities, it was suspended during the gloomy period. i had sought relief again and again from this quarter, but found none. after the tide had turned, and i was in process of recovery, i had been helped forward by music, but in a much less elevated manner. i at this time first became acquainted with weber's oberon, and the extreme pleasure which i drew from its delicious melodies did me good by showing me a source of pleasure to which i was as susceptible as ever. the good, however, was much impaired by the thought that the pleasure of music (as is quite true of such pleasure as this was, that of mere tune) fades with familiarity, and requires either to be revived by intermittence, or fed by continual novelty. and it is very characteristic both of my then state, and of the general tone of my mind at this period of my life, that i was seriously tormented by the thought of the exhaustibility of musical combinations. the octave consists only of five tones and two semi-tones, which can be put together in only a limited number of ways, of which but a small proportion are beautiful: most of these, it seemed to me, must have been already discovered, and there could not be room for a long succession of mozarts and webers, to strike out, as these had done, entirely new and surpassingly rich veins of musical beauty. this source of anxiety may, perhaps, be thought to resemble that of the philosophers of laputa, who feared lest the sun should be burnt out. it was, however, connected with the best feature in my character, and the only good point to be found in my very unromantic and in no way honourable distress. for though my dejection, honestly looked at, could not be called other than egotistical, produced by the ruin, as i thought, of my fabric of happiness, yet the destiny of mankind in general was ever in my thoughts, and could not be separated from my own. i felt that the flaw in my life, must be a flaw in life itself; that the question was, whether, if the reformers of society and government could succeed in their objects, and every person in the community were free and in a state of physical comfort, the pleasures of life, being no longer kept up by struggle and privation, would cease to be pleasures. and i felt that unless i could see my way to some better hope than this for human happiness in general, my dejection must continue; but that if i could see such an outlet, i should then look on the world with pleasure; content, as far as i was myself concerned, with any fair share of the general lot.
i now began to find meaning in the things i had read or heard about the importance of poetry and art as instruments of human culture. but it was only somewhat later that i began to know this by personal experience. music was the only imaginative art in which i had from childhood taken great pleasure. its best effect (in which it surpasses perhaps every other art) consists in exciting enthusiasm; in winding up to a high pitch those feelings of an elevated kind that are already in the character but to which this excitement gives a glow and a fervour which though transitory at its utmost height is precious for sustaining them at other times. this effect of music i had often experienced; but like all my pleasurable susceptibilities it was suspended during the gloomy period. i had sought relief again and again from this quarter, but found none. after the tide had turned and i was in the process of recovery, i was helped forward by music but in a much less elevated manner. at this time i first became acquainted with weber's oberon, and the extreme pleasure i drew from its delicious melodies did me good by showing me a source of pleasure to which i was as susceptible as ever. but the good was much impaired by the thought that the pleasure of music fades with familiarity, and needs to be revived by intermittence or fed by continual novelty. (and that is quite true of such pleasure as i was having, that of mere tune.) and it is very characteristic of my state at that time and of the general tone of my mind at this period of my life that i was seriously tormented by the thought of the exhaustibility of musical combinations. the octave consists of only five tones and two semi-tones, which can be put together in only a limited number of ways of which only a small proportion are beautiful; most of these (it seemed to me) must already have been discovered, and there could not be room for a long succession of mozarts and webers to strike out entirely new and surpassingly rich veins of musical beauty, as they had done. this source of anxiety may be thought to resemble that of the philosophers of laputa, who feared that the sun might burn out. but it was connected with the best feature in my character, and the only good point to be found in my very unromantic and in no way honourable distress. for though my dejection could not be called other than egotistical, produced by the ruin (i thought) of my fabric of happiness, yet the destiny of mankind in general was always in my thoughts and could not be separated from my own. the question was this: if the reformers of society and government could succeed in their objectives, and every person in the community were free and in a state of physical comfort, would the pleasures of life being no longer kept up by struggle and privation cease to be pleasures? and i felt that unless i could see my way to some better hope than this for human happiness in general, my dejection must continue; but that if i could see such an outlet i would then look on the world with pleasure, content with my fair share of the general lot.

this state of my thoughts and feelings made the fact of my reading wordsworth for the first time (in the autumn of 1828), an important event of my life. i took up the collection of his poems from curiosity, with no expectation of mental relief from it, though i had before resorted to poetry with that hope. in the worst period of my depression, i had read through the whole of byron (then new to me), to try whether a poet, whose peculiar department was supposed to be that of the intenser feelings, could rouse any feeling in me. as might be expected, i got no good from this reading, but the reverse. the poet's state of mind was too like my own. his was the lament of a man who had worn out all pleasures, and who seemed to think that life, to all who possess the good things of it, must necessarily be the vapid, uninteresting thing which i found it. his harold and manfred had the same burden on them which i had; and i was not in a frame of mind to desire any comfort from the vehement sensual passion of his giaours, or the sullenness of his laras. but while byron was exactly what did not suit my condition, wordsworth was exactly what did. i had looked into the excursion two or three years before, and found little in it; and i should probably have found as little, had i read it at this time. but the miscellaneous poems, in the two-volume edition of 1815 (to which little of value was added in the latter part of the author's life), proved to be the precise thing for my mental wants at that particular juncture.
wordsworth this state of my thoughts and feelings made the fact of my reading wordsworth for the first time (in the autumn of 1828) an important event in my life. i took up the collection of his poems from curiosity, with no expectation of mental relief from it, though i had before resorted to poetry with that hope. in the worst period of my depression, i had read through the whole of byron (then new to me), to see whether a poet, whose special department was supposed to be that of the intenser feelings could rouse any feeling in me. as might be expected, i got no good from this reading but the reverse. the poet's state of mind was too like my own. his was the lament of a man who had worn out all pleasures, and who seemed to think that life, to all who possess the good things of it, must necessarily be the vapid and uninteresting thing which i found it to be. his harold and manfred had the same burden on them that i had; and i was not in a frame of mind to derive any comfort from the vehement sensual passion of his giaours or the sullenness of his laras. but while byron was exactly what did not suit my condition, wordsworth was exactly what did. i had looked into the excursion two or three years before, and found little in it; and i would probably have found as little if i had read it at this time. but the miscellaneous poems in the two-volume edition of 1815 (to which little of value was added in the latter part of the author's life) proved to be the precise thing for my mental wants at that particular time.

in the first place, these poems addressed themselves powerfully to one of the strongest of my pleasurable susceptibilities, the love of rural objects and natural scenery; to which i had been indebted not only for much of the pleasure of my life, but quite recently for relief from one of my longest relapses into depression. in this power of rural beauty over me, there was a foundation laid for taking pleasure in wordsworth's poetry; the more so, as his scenery lies mostly among mountains, which, owing to my early pyrenean excursion, were my ideal of natural beauty. but wordsworth would never have had any great effect on me, if he had merely placed before me beautiful pictures of natural scenery. scott does this still better than wordsworth, and a very second-rate landscape does it more effectually than any poet. what made wordsworth's poems a medicine for my state of mind, was that they expressed, not mere outward beauty, but states of feeling, and of thought coloured by feeling, under the excitement of beauty. they seemed to be the very culture of the feelings, which i was in quest of. in them i seemed to draw from a source of inward joy, of sympathetic and imaginative pleasure, which could be shared in by all human beings; which had no connection with struggle or imperfection, but would be made richer by every improvement in the physical or social condition of mankind. from them i seemed to learn what would be the perennial sources of happiness, when all the greater evils of life shall have been removed. and i felt myself at once better and happier as i came under their influence. there have certainly been, even in our own age, greater poets than wordsworth; but poetry of deeper and loftier feeling could not have done for me at that time what his did. i needed to be made to feel that there was real, permanent happiness in tranquil contemplation. wordsworth taught me this, not only without turning away from, but with a greatly increased interest in, the common feelings and common destiny of human beings. and the delight which these poems gave me, proved that with culture of this sort, there was nothing to dread from the most confirmed habit of analysis. at the conclusion of the poems came the famous ode, falsely called platonic, intimations of immortality: in which, along with more than his usual sweetness of melody and rhythm, and along with the two passages of grand imagery but bad philosophy so often quoted, i found that he too had had similar experience to mine; that he also had felt that the first freshness of youthful enjoyment of life was not lasting; but that he had sought for compensation, and found it, in the way in which he was now teaching me to find it. the result was that i gradually, but completely, emerged from my habitual depression, and was never again subject to it. i long continued to value wordsworth less according to his intrinsic merits, than by the measure of what he had done for me. compared with the greatest poets, he may be said to be the poet of unpoetical natures, possessed of quiet and contemplative tastes. but unpoetical natures are precisely those which require poetic cultivation. this cultivation wordsworth is much more fitted to give, than poets who are intrinsically far more poets than he.
in the first place, these poems addressed themselves powerfully to one of the strongest of my pleasurable susceptibilities, the love of rural objects and natural scenery; to which i had been indebted not only for much of the pleasure of my life but quite recently for relief from one of my longest relapses into depression. this power over me of rural beauty laid a foundation for taking pleasure in wordsworth's poetry, especially since his scenery lies mostly among mountains, which (because of my early pyrenean excursion) were my ideal of natural beauty. but wordsworth would never have had any great effect on me if he had merely placed before me beautiful pictures of natural scenery. scott does this even better than wordsworth, and a very second-rate landscape does it more effectively than any poet. what made wordsworth's poems a medicine for my state of mind was that they expressed not mere outward beauty but states of feeling and of thought coloured by feeling under the excitement of beauty. they seemed to be the very culture of the feelings that i was looking for. in them i seemed to draw from a spring of inward joy, of sympathetic and imaginative pleasure, which all human beings could share in; which had no connection with struggle or imperfection but would be made richer by every improvement in the physical or social condition of mankind. from those poems i seemed to learn what would be the perennial sources of happiness when all the greater evils of life had been removed; and as i came under their influence i felt myself better and happier. there have certainly been, even in our own time, greater poets than wordsworth; but poetry of deeper and loftier feeling could not have done for me at that time what his did. i needed to be made to feel that there was real, permanent happiness in tranquil contemplation. wordsworth taught me this, not only without turning away from the common feelings and common destiny of human beings but with a greatly increased interest in them. and the delight these poems gave me proved that with culture of this sort there was nothing to dread from the most confirmed habit of analysis. at the conclusion of the poems came the famous ode, falsely called platonic, intimations of immortality, in which along with more than his usual sweetness of melody and rhythm, and along with the two passages of grand imagery but bad philosophy so often quoted i found that he too had had experience similar to mine; that he also had felt that the first freshness of youthful enjoyment of life was not lasting; but that he had sought for and found compensation in the way in which he was now teaching me to find it. the result was that i gradually, but completely, emerged from my habitual depression and was never again subject to it. i long continued to value wordsworth less according to his intrinsic merits than by the measure of what he had done for me. compared with the greatest poets he may be said to be the poet of unpoetical natures with quiet and contemplative tastes. but unpoetical natures are precisely those that require poetic cultivation. wordsworth is more fitted to provide it than poets who are more poets than he.

it so fell out that the merits of wordsworth were the occasion of my first public declaration of my new way of thinking, and separation from those of my habitual companions who had not undergone a similar change. the person with whom at that time i was most in the habit of comparing notes on such subjects was roebuck, and i induced him to read wordsworth, in whom he also at first seemed to find much to admire: but i, like most wordsworthians, threw myself into strong antagonism to byron, both as a poet and as to his influence on the character. roebuck, all whose instincts were those of action and struggle, had, on the contrary, a strong relish and great admiration of byron, whose writings he regarded as the poetry of human life, while wordsworth's, according to him, was that of flowers and butterflies. we agreed to have the fight out at our debating society, where we accordingly discussed for two evenings the comparative merits of byron and wordsworth, propounding and illustrating by long recitations our respective theories of poetry: sterling also, in a brilliant speech, putting forward his particular theory. this was the first debate on any weighty subject in which roebuck and i had been on opposite sides. the schism between us widened from this time more and more, though we continued for some years longer to be companions. in the beginning, our chief divergence related to the cultivation of the feelings. roebuck was in many respects very different from the vulgar notion of a benthamite or utilitarian. he was a lover of poetry and of most of the fine arts. he took great pleasure in music, in dramatic performances, especially in painting, and himself drew and designed landscapes with great facility and beauty. but he never could be made to see that these things have any value as aids in the formation of character. personally, instead of being, as benthamites are supposed to be, void of feeling, he had very quick and strong sensibilities. but, like most englishmen who have feelings, he found his feelings stand very much in his way. he was much more susceptible to the painful sympathies than to the pleasurable, and, looking for his happiness elsewhere, he wished that his feelings should be deadened rather than quickened. and, in truth, the english character, and english social circumstances, make it so seldom possible to derive happiness from the exercise of the sympathies, that it is not wonderful if they count for little in an englishman's scheme of life. in most other countries the paramount importance of the sympathies as a constituent of individual happiness is an axiom, taken for granted rather than needing any formal statement; but most english thinkers always seem to regard them as necessary evils, required for keeping men's actions benevolent and compassionate. roebuck was, or appeared to be, this kind of englishman. he saw little good in any cultivation of the feelings, and none at all in cultivating them through the imagination, which he thought was only cultivating illusions. it was in vain i urged on him that the imaginative emotion which an idea, when vividly conceived, excites in us, is not an illusion but a fact, as real as any of the other qualities of objects; and, far from implying anything erroneous and delusive in our mental apprehension of the object, is quite consistent with the most accurate knowledge and most perfect practical recognition of all its physical and intellectual laws and relations. the intensest feeling of the beauty of a cloud lighted by the setting sun, is no hindrance to my knowing that the cloud is vapour of water, subject to all the laws of vapours in a state of suspension; and i am just as likely to allow for, and act on, these physical laws whenever there is occasion to do so, as if i had been incapable of perceiving any distinction between beauty and ugliness.
roebuck and feelings it so happened that the merits of wordsworth were the occasion of my first public declaration of my new way of thinking, and my separation from those of my habitual companions who had not undergone a similar change. the person with whom at that time i was most in the habit of comparing notes on such subjects was roebuck, and i induced him to read wordsworth, in whom he also at first seemed to find much to admire: but like most wordsworthians i threw myself into strong antagonism to byron, both as a poet and as to his influence on the character. roebuck, whose instincts were all those of action and struggle, had a strong liking and great admiration for byron. he regarded byron's writings as the poetry of human life, while wordsworth's, according to him, was that of flowers and butterflies. we agreed to have the fight out at our debating society, where we accordingly spent two evenings discussing the comparative merits of byron and wordsworth, propounding our respective theories of poetry and illustrating them by long recitations. sterling also, in a brilliant speech, put forward his particular theory. this was the first debate on any weighty subject in which roebuck and i had been on opposite sides. the schism between us widened more and more from this time, though we continued for some years to be companions. in the beginning our chief divergence related to the cultivation of the feelings. roebuck was in many respects very different from the vulgar notion of a benthamite or utilitarian. he was a lover of poetry and of most of the fine arts. he took great pleasure in music, in dramatic performances, especially in painting, and himself drew and designed landscapes with great facility and beauty. but he never could be made to see that these things have any value as aids in the formation of character. personally he had very quick and strong sensibilities, instead of being void of feeling as benthamites are supposed to be. but, like most englishmen who have feelings, he found his feelings standing very much in his way. he was much more susceptible to the painful sympathies than to the pleasurable, and looking for his happiness elsewhere he wished that his feelings should be deadened rather than enlivened. and indeed the english character and english social circumstances make it so seldom possible to derive happiness from the exercise of the sympathies that it is not surprising if they count for little in an englishman's scheme of life. in most other countries the paramount importance of the sympathies as a constituent of individual happiness is an axiom, taken for granted rather than needing any formal statement; but most english thinkers almost seem to regard them as necessary evils, required for keeping men's actions benevolent and compassionate. roebuck was or appeared to be this kind of englishman. he saw little good in any cultivation of the feelings, and none at all in cultivating them through the imagination, which he thought was only cultivating illusions. in vain i urged on him that the imaginative emotion which a vividly conceived idea arouses in us is not an illusion but a fact, as real as any of the other qualities of objects; and far from implying anything erroneous and delusive in our mental grasp of the object, is quite consistent with the most accurate knowledge and most perfect practical recognition of all its physical and intellectual laws and relations. the intensest feeling of the beauty of a cloud lighted by the setting sun is no hindrance to my knowing that the cloud is water-vapour that falls under all the laws of vapours in a state of suspension; and i am just as likely to act on these physical laws whenever there is occasion to do so as if i had been incapable of distinguishing beauty from ugliness.

while my intimacy with roebuck diminished, i fell more and more into friendly intercourse with our coleridgian adversaries in the society, frederick maurice and john sterling, both subsequently so well known, the former by his writings, the latter through the biographies by hare and carlyle. of these two friends, maurice was the thinker, sterling the orator, and impassioned expositor of thoughts which, at this period, were almost entirely formed for him by maurice.
frederick maurice

with maurice i had for some time been acquainted through eyton tooke, who had known him at cambridge, and although my discussions with him were almost always disputes, i had carried away from them much that helped to build up my new fabric of thought, in the same way as i was deriving much from coleridge, and from the writings of goethe and other german authors which i read during these years. i have so deep a respect for maurice's character and purposes, as well as for his great mental gifts, that it is with some unwillingness i say anything which may seem to place him on a less high eminence than i would gladly be able to accord to him. but i have always thought that there was more intellectual power wasted in maurice than in any other of my contemporaries. few of them certainly have had so much to waste. great powers of generalization, rare ingenuity and subtlety, and a wide perception of important and unobvious truths, served him not for putting something better into the place of the worthless heap of received opinions on the great subjects of thought, but for proving to his own mind that the church of england had known everything from the first, and that all the truths on the ground of which the church and orthodoxy have been attacked (many of which he saw as clearly as anyone) are not only consistent with the thirty-nine articles, but are better understood and expressed in those articles than by anyone who rejects them. i have never been able to find any other explanation of this, than by attributing it to that timidity of conscience, combined with original sensitiveness of temperament, which has so often driven highly gifted men into romanism, from the need of a firmer support than they can find in the independent conclusions of their own judgment. any more vulgar kind of timidity no one who knew maurice would ever think of imputing to him, even if he had not given public proof of his freedom from it, by his ultimate collision with some of the opinions commonly regarded as orthodox, and by his noble origination of the christian socialist movement. the nearest parallel to him, in a moral point of view, is coleridge, to whom, in merely intellectual power, apart from poetical genius, i think him decidedly superior. at this time, however, he might be described as a disciple of coleridge, and sterling as a disciple of coleridge and of him. the modifications which were taking place in my old opinions gave me some points of contact with them; and both maurice and sterling were of considerable use to my development. with sterling i soon became very intimate, and was more attached to him than i have ever been to any other man. he was indeed one of the most lovable of men. his frank, cordial, affectionate, and expansive character; a love of truth alike conspicuous in the highest things and the humblest; a generous and ardent nature, which threw itself with impetuosity into the opinions it adopted, but was as eager to do justice to the doctrines and the men it was opposed to, as to make war on what it thought their errors; and an equal devotion to the two cardinal points of liberty and duty, formed a combination of qualities as attractive to me as to all others who knew him as well as i did. with his open mind and heart, he found no difficulty in joining hands with me across the gulf which as yet divided our opinions. he told me how he and others had looked upon me (from hearsay information), as a made or manufactured man, having had a certain impress of opinion stamped on me which i could only reproduce; and what a change took place in his feelings when he found, in the discussion on wordsworth and byron, that wordsworth, and all which that name implies, belonged to me as much as to him and his friends. the failure of his health soon scattered all his plans of life, and compelled him to live at a distance from london, so that after the first year or two of our acquaintance, we only saw each other at distant intervals. but (as he said himself in one of his letters to carlyle) when we did meet it was like brothers. though he was never, in the full sense of the word, a profound thinker, his openness of mind, and the moral courage in which he greatly surpassed maurice, made him outgrow the dominion which maurice and coleridge had once exercised over his intellect; though he retained to the last a great but discriminating admiration of both, and towards maurice a warm affection. except in that short and transitory phasis of his life, during which he made the mistake of becoming a clergyman, his mind was ever progressive: and the advance he always seemed to have made when i saw him after an interval, made me apply to him what goethe said of schiller, er hatte eine furchtliche fortschreitung. he and i started from intellectual points almost as wide apart as the poles, but the distance between us was always diminishing: if i made steps towards some of his opinions, he, during his short life, was constantly approximating more and more to several of mine: and if he had lived, and had health and vigour to prosecute his ever assiduous self-culture, there is no knowing how much further this spontaneous assimilation might have proceeded.
while my intimacy with roebuck diminished, i fell more and more into friendly intercourse with our coleridgian adversaries in the society frederick maurice and john sterling, both subsequently so well known, the former by his writings, the latter through the biographies by hare and carlyle. of these two friends maurice was the thinker and sterling the orator the impassioned expositor of thoughts which at this time were almost entirely formed for him by maurice. i had for some time been acquainted with maurice through eyton tooke, who had known him at cambridge, and though my discussions with him were almost always disputes, i had carried away from them much that helped me to build up my new fabric of thought, in the same way as i was deriving much from coleridge and from the writings of goethe and other german authors which i read during those years. i have so deep a respect for maurice's character and purposes, as well as for his great mental gifts, that i am reluctant to say anything that may seem to place him on a less high eminence than i would like to be able to grant to him. but i have always thought that more intellectual power was wasted in maurice than in any other of my contemporaries. few of them certainly have had so much to waste. great powers of generalisation, rare ingenuity and subtlety, and a wide perception of important and unobvious truths, served him not for putting something better into the place of the worthless heap of received opinions on the great subjects of thought, but for proving to his own satisfaction that the church of england had known everything from the first, and that all the truths on the basis of which the church and orthodoxy have been attacked (many of which he saw as clearly as anyone) are not only consistent with the thirty-nine articles but are better understood and expressed in those articles than by anyone who rejects them. i have never been able to find any explanation of this other than by attributing it to that timidity of conscience, combined with basic sensitiveness of temperament, which has so often driven highly gifted men into romanism from the need for a firmer support than they can find in the independent conclusions of their own judgment. no-one who knew maurice would ever think of imputing to him any more vulgar kind of timidity, even if he had not given public proof of his freedom from it by his ultimate collision with some of the opinions commonly regarded as orthodox and by his noble origination of the christian socialist movement. from a moral point of view the nearest parallel to him is coleridge, to whom i think him decidedly superior in merely intellectual power, apart from poetical genius. at this time, however, he might be described as a disciple of coleridge, and sterling as a disciple of coleridge and of him. the changes that my old opinions were undergoing gave me some points of contact with them; and both maurice and sterling were of considerable use to my development.

after 1829 i withdrew from attendance on the debating society. i had had enough of speech-making, and was glad to carry on my private studies and meditations without any immediate call for outward assertion of their results. i found the fabric of my old and taught opinions giving way in many fresh places, and i never allowed it to fall to pieces, but was incessantly occupied in weaving it anew. i never, in the course of my transition, was content to remain, for ever so short a time, confused and unsettled. when i had taken in any new idea, i could not rest till i had adjusted its relation to my old opinions, and ascertained exactly how far its effect ought to extend in modifying or superseding them.
after 1829 i stopped attending meetings of the debating society. i had had enough of speech-making, and was glad to carry on my private studies and meditations without any immediate call for outward assertion of their results. i found the fabric of my old taught opinions giving way in many fresh places; i never allowed it to fall to pieces, but was constantly occupied in weaving it anew. during this transition i was never content to remain confused and unsettled, even for a moment. when i had taken in any new idea, i could not rest till i had adjusted its relation to my old opinions and ascertained exactly how much it ought to modify or supersede them.

the conflicts which i had so often had to sustain in defending the theory of government laid down in bentham's and my father's writings, and the acquaintance i had obtained with other schools of political thinking, made me aware of many things which that doctrine, professing to be a theory of government in general, ought to have made room for, and did not. but these things, as yet, remained with me rather as corrections to be made in applying the theory to practice, than as defects in the theory. i felt that politics could not be a science of specific experience; and that the accusations against the benthamic theory of being a theory, of proceeding a priori by way of general reasoning, instead of baconian experiment, showed complete ignorance of bacon's principles, and of the necessary conditions of experimental investigation. at this juncture appeared in the edinburgh review, macaulay's famous attack on my father's essay on government. this gave me much to think about. i saw that macaulay's conception of the logic of politics was erroneous; that he stood up for the empirical mode of treating political phenomena, against the philosophical; that even in physical science his notions of philosophizing might have recognised kepler, but would have excluded newton and laplace. but i could not help feeling, that though the tone was unbecoming (an error for which the writer, at a later period, made the most ample and honourable amends), there was truth in several of his strictures on my father's treatment of the subject; that my father's premises were really too narrow, and included but a small number of the general truths on which, in politics, the important consequences depend. identity of interest between the governing body and the community at large is not, in any practical sense which can be attached to it, the only thing on which good government depends; neither can this identity of interest be secured by the mere conditions of election. i was not at all satisfied with the mode in which my father met the criticisms of macaulay. he did not, as i thought he ought to have done, justify himself by saying, i was not writing a scientific treatise on politics, i was writing an argument for parliamentary reform. he treated macaulay's argument as simply irrational; an attack upon the reasoning faculty; an example of the saying of hobbes, that when reason is against a man, a man will be against reason. this made me think that there was really something more fundamentally erroneous in my father's conception of philosophical method, as applicable to politics, than i had hitherto supposed there was. but i did not at first see clearly what the error might be. at last it flashed upon me all at once in the course of other studies. in the early part of 1830 i had begun to put on paper the ideas on logic (chiefly on the distinctions among terms, and the import of propositions) which had been suggested and in part worked out in the morning conversations already spoken of. having secured these thoughts from being lost, i pushed on into the other parts of the subject, to try whether i could do anything further towards clearing up the theory of logic generally. i grappled at once with the problem of induction, postponing that of reasoning, on the ground that it is necessary to obtain premises before we can reason from them. now, induction is mainly a process for finding the causes of effects: and in attempting to fathom the mode of tracing causes and effects in physical science, i soon saw that in the more perfect of the sciences, we ascend, by generalization from particulars, to the tendencies of causes considered singly, and then reason downward from those separate tendencies, to the effect of the same causes when combined. i then asked myself, what is the ultimate analysis of this deductive process; the common theory of the syllogism evidently throwing no light upon it. my practice (learnt from hobbes and my father) being to study abstract principles by means of the best concrete instances i could find, the composition of forces, in dynamics, occurred to me as the most complete example of the logical process i was investigating. on examining, accordingly, what the mind does when it applies the principle of the composition of forces, i found that it performs a simple act of addition. it adds the separate effect of the one force to the separate effect of the other, and puts down the sum of these separate effects as the joint effect. but is this a legitimate process? in dynamics, and in all the mathematical branches of physics, it is; but in some other cases, as in chemistry, it is not; and i then recollected that something not unlike this was pointed out as one of the distinctions between chemical and mechanical phenomena, in the introduction to that favourite of my boyhood, thompson's system of chemistry. this distinction at once made my mind clear as to what was perplexing me in respect to the philosophy of politics. i now saw, that a science is either deductive or experimental, according as, in the province it deals with, the effects of causes when conjoined, are or are not the sums of the effects which the same causes produce when separate. it followed that politics must be a deductive science. it thus appeared, that both macaulay and my father were wrong; the one in assimilating the method of philosophizing in politics to the purely experimental method of chemistry; while the other, though right in adopting a deductive method, had made a wrong selection of one, having taken as the type of deduction, not the appropriate process, that of the deductive branches of natural philosophy, but the inappropriate one of pure geometry, which, not being a science of causation at all, does not require or admit of any summing-up of effects. a foundation was thus laid in my thoughts for the principal chapters of what i afterwards published on the logic of the moral sciences; and my new position in respect to my old political creed, now became perfectly definite.
the conflicts i had so often had to sustain in defending the theory of government laid down in bentham's and my father's writings, and what i had learned of other schools of political thinking, made me aware of many things which that doctrine professing to be a theory of government in general ought to have made room for, and did not. but these things had until now remained with me as corrections to be made in applying the theory to practice rather than as defects in the theory. i felt that politics could not be a science of specific experience; and that the accusations against the benthamic theory of being a theory, of proceeding a priori by way of general reasoning instead of baconian experiment, showed complete ignorance of bacon's principles and of the necessary conditions of experimental investigation. at this point there appeared in the edinburgh review macaulay's famous attack on my father's essay on government. this gave me much to think about. i saw that macaulay's conception of the logic of politics was erroneous; that he stood up for the empirical mode of treating political phenomena against the philosophical; that even in physical science his notion of philosophising might have recognised kepler but would have excluded newton and laplace. but i could not help feeling that though the tone was inappropriate (an error for which macaulay later made the most ample and honourable amends) there was truth in several of his strictures on my father's treatment of the subject; that my father's premises were really too narrow, including only a small number of the general truths on which the important consequences in politics depend. identity of interest between the governing body and the community at large is not, in any practical sense that can be attached to it, the only thing on which good government depends; nor can this identity of interest be secured merely by having the right electoral system. i was not at all satisfied with my father's way of meeting macaulay's criticisms. he did not, as i thought he ought to have done, justify himself by saying :i was not writing a scientific treatise on politics, i was writing an argument for parliamentary reform. he treated macaulay's argument as simply irrational, an attack on the reasoning faculty, an example of hobbes's remark that when reason is against a man, a man will be against reason. this made me think that in my father's conception of philosophical method, as applicable to politics, there was really something more deeply wrong than i had hitherto believed. but i did not at first see clearly what the error might be. at last it flashed on me all at once in the course of other studies. in the early part of 1830 i had begun to put on paper the ideas on logic (chiefly on the distinctions among terms and the import of propositions) which had been suggested and in part worked out in the morning conversations i spoke of here. having secured these thoughts from being lost, i pushed on into the other parts of the subject, to see whether i could do anything more towards clearing up the theory of logic generally. i grappled at once with the problem of induction, postponing that of reasoning, on the ground that you can't reason from premises until you have obtained them by induction. now, induction is mainly a process for finding the causes of effects; and in trying to trying to understand the way of tracing causes and effects in physical science i soon saw that in the more perfect sciences we ascend by generalisation from particulars to the tendencies of causes considered singly, and then reason downward from those separate tendencies to the effect of the same causes when combined. i then asked myself what is the ultimate analysis of this deductive process?, because the common theory of the syllogism obviously throws no light on it. my practice (learned from hobbes and my father) being to study abstract principles by means of the best concrete instances i could find, i chose the composition of forces in dynamics as the most complete example of the logical process i was investigating. so, examining what the mind does when it applies the principle of the composition of forces, i found that it performs a simple act of addition. it adds the separate effect of the one force to the separate effect of the other and puts down the sum of these as the joint effect. but is this a legitimate process? in dynamics and all the mathematical branches of physics it is; but in some other cases, e.g. chemistry, it is not; and i then recollected that something like this was pointed out as one of the distinctions between chemical and mechanical phenomena in the introduction to that favourite of my boyhood, thomson's system of chemistry. this distinction at once made my mind clear as to what was puzzling me about the philosophy of politics. i now saw that whether a science is deductive or experimental depends on whether in the province it deals with the effects of conjoined causes are or are not the sums of the effects that the same causes produce when separate. it followed that politics must be a deductive science. it thus appeared that macaulay and my father were both wrong: macaulay had assimilated the method of philosophising in politics to the purely experimental method of chemistry; while my father, though right in adopting a deductive method, had chosen the wrong one, not the appropriate process, that of the deductive branches of natural philosophy, but the inappropriate one of pure geometry, which not being a science of causation at all does not involve any summing-up of effects. a foundation was thus laid in my thoughts for the principal chapters of what i afterwards published on the logic of the moral sciences; and my new position's relation to my old political creed now became perfectly definite.

if i am asked, what system of political philosophy i substituted for that which, as a philosophy, i had abandoned, i answer, no system: only a conviction that the true system was something much more complex and many-sided than i had previously had any idea of, and that its office was to supply, not a set of model institutions, but principles from which the institutions suitable to any given circumstances might be deduced. the influences of european, that is to say, continental, thought, and especially those of the reaction of the nineteenth century against the eighteenth, were now streaming in upon me. they came from various quarters: from the writings of coleridge, which i had begun to read with interest even before the change in my opinions; from the coleridgians with whom i was in personal intercourse; from what i had read of goethe; from carlyle's early articles in the edinburgh and foreign reviews, though for a long time i saw nothing in these (as my father saw nothing in them to the last) but insane rhapsody. from these sources, and from the acquaintance i kept up with the french literature of the time, i derived, among other ideas which the general turning upside down of the opinions of european thinkers had brought uppermost, these in particular: that the human mind has a certain order of possible progress, in which some things must precede others, an order which governments and public instructors can modify to some, but not to an unlimited extent: that all questions of political institutions are relative, not absolute, and that different stages of human progress not only will have, but ought to have, different institutions: that government is always either in the hands, or passing into the hands, of whatever is the strongest power in society, and that what this power is, does not depend on institutions, but institutions on it: that any general theory or philosophy of politics supposes a previous theory of human progress, and that this is the same thing with a philosophy of history. these opinions, true in the main, were held in an exaggerated and violent manner by the thinkers with whom i was now most accustomed to compare notes, and who, as usual with a reaction, ignored that half of the truth which the thinkers of the eighteenth century saw. but though, at one period of my progress, i for some time undervalued that great century, i never joined in the reaction against it, but kept as firm hold of one side of the truth as i took of the other. the fight between the nineteenth century and the eighteenth always reminded me of the battle about the shield, one side of which was white and the other black. i marvelled at the blind rage with which the combatants rushed against one another. i applied to them, and to coleridge himself, many of coleridge's sayings about half truths; and goethe's device, many-sidedness, was one which i would most willingly, at this period, have taken for mine.
if i am asked what system of political philosophy i substituted for the one which (as a philosopher) i had abandoned, i answer: no system; only a conviction that the true system was much more complex and many-sided than anything i had previously had any idea of, and that its role was to supply not a set of model institutions but principles from which the institutions suitable to any given circumstances might be deduced. the influences of european i.e. continental thought, and especially those of the reaction of the 19th century against the 18th, were now streaming in on me. they came from various quarters: from the writings of coleridge, which i had begun to read with interest even before the change in my opinions; from the coleridgians with whom i had personal contact; from what i had read by goethe; from carlyle's early articles in the edinburgh review and the foreign review, though for a long time i saw nothing in these but insane ramblings (my father never saw anything in them but that). from these sources, and from the acquaintance i kept up with the french literature of the time, i derived among other ideas that came to the surface when the opinions of european thinkers turned everything upside-down the following in particular. (i) that the human mind has a certain order of possible progress, in which some things must precede others, an order that governments and public instructors can modify but only within limits. (ii) that all questions of political institutions are relative, not absolute, and that different stages of human progress will and should have different institutions. (iii) that government is always in (or passing into) the hands of whatever is the strongest power in society, and that what this power is doesn't depend on institutions but institutions depend on it. (iv) that any general theory or philosophy of politics must rest on a preceding theory of human progress, and that this is the same thing as a philosophy of history. these mainly true opinions were held in an exaggerated and violent manner by the thinkers with whom i was now most accustomed to compare notes, and who as usual with a reaction ignored the half of the truth that the 18th century thinkers saw. but though at one period of my progress i for a while under-valued that great century, i never joined in the reaction against it, but kept as firm a hold on one side of the truth as i had on the other. the fight between the 19th century and the 18th always reminded me of the battle about the shield, one side of which was white and the other black. i marvelled at the blind rage with which the combatants rushed against one another. i applied to them and to coleridge himself many of coleridge's sayings about half truths; and goethe's motto , many-sidedness, was one which i then would willingly have taken for mine.

the writers by whom, more than by any others, a new mode of political thinking was brought home to me, were those of the st. simonian school in france. in 1829 and 1830 i became acquainted with some of their writings. they were then only in the earlier stages of their speculations. they had not yet dressed out their philosophy as a religion, nor had they organized their scheme of socialism. they were just beginning to question the principle of hereditary property. i was by no means prepared to go with them even this length; but i was greatly struck with the connected view which they for the first time presented to me, of the natural order of human progress; and especially with their division of all history into organic periods and critical periods. during the organic periods (they said) mankind accept with firm conviction some positive creed, claiming jurisdiction over all their actions, and containing more or less of truth and adaptation to the needs of humanity. under its influence they make all the progress compatible with the creed, and finally outgrow it; when a period follows of criticism and negation, in which mankind lose their old convictions without acquiring any new ones, of a general or authoritative character, except the conviction that the old are false. the period of greek and roman polytheism, so long as really believed in by instructed greeks and romans, was an organic period, succeeded by the critical or sceptical period of the greek philosophers. another organic period came in with christianity. the corresponding critical period began with the reformation, has lasted ever since, still lasts, and cannot altogether cease until a new organic period has been inaugurated by the triumph of a yet more advanced creed. these ideas, i knew, were not peculiar to the st. simonians; on the contrary, they were the general property of europe, or at least of germany and france, but they had never, to my knowledge, been so completely systematized as by these writers, nor the distinguishing characteristics of a critical period so powerfully set forth; for i was not then acquainted with fichte's lectures on the characteristics of the present age. in carlyle, indeed, i found bitter denunciations of an age of unbelief, and of the present age as such, which i, like most people at that time, supposed to be passionate protests in favour of the old modes of belief. but all that was true in these denunciations, i thought that i found more calmly and philosophically stated by the st. simonians. among their publications, too, there was one which seemed to me far superior to the rest; in which the general idea was matured into something much more definite and instructive. this was an early work of auguste comte, who then called himself, and even announced himself in the title-page as, a pupil of saint simon. in this tract m. comte first put forth the doctrine, which he afterwards so copiously illustrated, of the natural succession of three stages in every department of human knowledge: first, the theological, next the metaphysical, and lastly, the positive stage; and contended, that social science must be subject to the same law; that the feudal and catholic system was the concluding phasis of the theological state of the social science, protestantism the commencement, and the doctrines of the french revolution the consummation, of the metaphysical; and that its positive state was yet to come. this doctrine harmonized well with my existing notions, to which it seemed to give a scientific shape. i already regarded the methods of physical science as the proper models for political. but the chief benefit which i derived at this time from the trains of thought suggested by the st. simonians and by comte, was, that i obtained a clearer conception than ever before of the peculiarities of an era of transition in opinion, and ceased to mistake the moral and intellectual characteristics of such an era, for the normal attributes of humanity. i looked forward, through the present age of loud disputes but generally weak convictions, to a future which shall unite the best qualities of the critical with the best qualities of the organic periods; unchecked liberty of thought, unbounded freedom of individual action in all modes not hurtful to others; but also, convictions as to what is right and wrong, useful and pernicious, deeply engraven on the feelings by early education and general unanimity of sentiment, and so firmly grounded in reason and in the true exigencies of life, that they shall not, like all former and present creeds, religious, ethical, and political, require to be periodically thrown off and replaced by others.
especially from the st. simonians the writers of the st. simonian school in france did more than any others to bring home to me a new mode of political thinking. in 1829 and 1830 i read some of their writings. they were then only in the earlier stages of their theorising. they had not yet dressed up their philosophy as a religion, nor had they organised their scheme of socialism. they were just beginning to question the principle of hereditary property. i was by no means prepared to go with them even this far, but i was greatly struck with the connected view of the natural order of human progress that they for the first time presented to me, and especially with their division of all history into organic periods and critical periods. during the organic periods (they said) mankind accept with firm conviction some positive creed, claiming jurisdiction over all their actions and containing more or less of truth and adaptation to the needs of humanity. under its influence they make all the progress compatible with the creed, and finally outgrow it. then follows a period of criticism and negation, in which mankind lose their old convictions without acquiring any new ones of a general or authoritative sort, except the conviction that the old ones are false. the period of greek and roman polytheism, so long as this was really believed in by educated greeks and romans, was an organic period, succeeded by the critical or sceptical period of the greek philosophers. another organic period came in with christianity. the corresponding critical period began with the reformation, has lasted ever since, still continues, and cannot altogether cease until a new organic period has been inaugurated by the triumph of a still more advanced creed. i knew that these ideas were not peculiar to the st. simonians; on the contrary, they were the general property of europe or at least of germany and france; but so far as i knew they had never been so completely systematised as by these writers, nor had the distinguishing characteristics of a critical period been so powerfully set forth; for i had not then encountered fichte's lectures on the characteristics of the present age. in carlyle, indeed, i found bitter denunciations of an age of unbelief and of the present as being such; and like most people at that time i supposed these to be passionate protests in favour of the old modes of belief. but anything true in these denunciations i found more calmly and philosophically stated (i thought) by the st. simonians. one of their publications seemed to me far superior to the rest; in it the general idea was matured into something much more definite and instructive. this was an early work of auguste comte, who then called himself a pupil of saint-simon and even announced himself as such on the title-page. in this tract m. comte first put forth the doctrine, which he afterwards so copiously illustrated, of the natural succession of three stages in every department of human knowledge: (a) the theological, (b) the metaphysical, and (c) the positive stage. he contended that social science must be subject to the same three-stage law that (a) the feudal and catholic system was the concluding phase of the theological state of the social science, that (b) protestantism was the start of the metaphysical state and the doctrines of the french revolution were its consummation, and that (c) its positive state was yet to come. this doctrine harmonised well with my existing notions, to which it seemed to give a scientific shape. i already regarded the methods of physical science as the proper models for political science. but the chief benefit i derived at this time from the trains of thought suggested by the st. simonians and by comte was that i obtained a clearer conception than ever before of what was special about an era of transition in opinion, and stopped mistaking the moral and intellectual characteristics of such an era for the normal attributes of humanity. i looked forward, through the present age of loud disputes but generally weak convictions, to a future in which the best qualities of the critical period unchecked liberty of thought, unbounded freedom of individual action in all modes not hurtful to others would be united with the best quality of the organic period: convictions as to what is right and wrong, useful and pernicious, deeply engraven on the feelings by early education and general unanimity of sentiment, and so firmly grounded in reason and in the real demands of life that they won't have to be periodically thrown off and replaced by others, as have all former and present religious, ethical, and political creeds.

the characters of others, and disbelieved in regard to their own. i pondered painfully on the subject till gradually i saw light through it. i perceived, that the word necessity, as a name for the doctrine of cause and effect applied to human action, carried with it a misleading association; and that this association was the operative force in the depressing and paralysing influence which i had experienced: i saw that though our character is formed by circumstances, our own desires can do much to shape those circumstances; and that what is really inspiriting and ennobling in the doctrine of freewill is the conviction that we have real power over the formation of our own character; that our will, by influencing some of our circumstances, can modify our future habits or capabilities of willing. all this was entirely consistent with the doctrine of circumstances, or rather, was that doctrine itself, properly understood. from that time i drew, in my own mind, a clear distinction between the doctrine of circumstances and fatalism; discarding altogether the misleading word necessity. the theory, which i now for the first time rightly apprehended, ceased altogether to be discouraging; and, besides the relief to my spirits, i no longer suffered under the burden so heavy to one who aims at being a reformer in opinions of thinking one doctrine true and the contrary doctrine morally beneficial. the train of thought which had extricated me from this dilemma seemed to me, in after years, fitted to render a similar service to others; and it now forms the chapter on liberty and necessity in the concluding book of my system of logic.
in giving an account of this period of my life, i have specified only such of my new impressions as appeared to me (then and since) to be turning points marking a definite progress in my mode of thought. but these few selected points give a very insufficient idea of the amount of thinking i engaged in on a host of subjects during these years of transition. much of this, it is true, consisted in rediscovering things known to all the world that i had previously disbelieved or disregarded. but the rediscovery was to me a discovery, giving me full possession of the truths, not as traditional platitudes but fresh from their source; and it usually placed them in some new light by which they were reconciled with and seemed to confirm while they also modified the less generally known truths that lay in my early opinions, truths that in their essentials i had unwaveringly held to. all my new thinking only laid the foundation of these more deeply and strongly, while it often removed misapprehension and confusion of ideas that had perverted their effect. for example, during later episodes of dejection the doctrine of philosophical necessity weighed on my existence like an an oppressive nightmare. i felt as if i was scientifically proved to be the helpless slave of antecedent circumstances; as if my character and that of all others had been formed for us by agencies beyond our control, and was wholly out of our own power. i often said to myself what a relief it would be if i could disbelieve the doctrine of the formation of character by circumstances! ; and remembering fox's wish that the doctrine of resistance to governments might never be forgotten by kings nor remembered by subjects, i said that it would be a blessing if the doctrine of necessity could be believed by each person as applied to the characters of others and disbelieved as applied to his own. i pondered painfully on the subject until gradually i saw light through it. i saw that the word necessity, as a name for the doctrine of cause and effect, carried with it a misleading association when applied to human action; and that this association was the operative force in the depressing and paralysing influence that i had experienced. i saw that though our character is formed by circumstances, our own desires can do much to shape those circumstances; and that what is really inspiriting and ennobling in the doctrine of free-will is the conviction that we have real power over the formation of our own character; that our will, by influencing some of our circumstances, can modify our future habits or capabilities of willing. all this was entirely consistent with the doctrine of the formation of character by circumstances, or rather it was that doctrine properly understood. from that time i clearly distinguished the doctrine of the formation of character by circumstances from fatalism, and discarded altogether the misleading word necessity. the doctrine which i now for the first time rightly grasped ceased altogether to be discouraging, and besides the relief to my spirits i no longer suffered under the burden of thinking one doctrine to be true and its contrary to be morally beneficial, a heavy burden to one who aims at being a reformer in opinions! the train of thought that had extricated me from this dilemma seemed to me in later years to be fitted to render a similar service to others; and it now forms the chapter on liberty and necessity in my system of logic.

again, in politics, though i no longer accepted the doctrine of the essay on government as a scientific theory; though i ceased to consider representative democracy as an absolute principle, and regarded it as a question of time, place, and circumstance; though i now looked upon the choice of political institutions as a moral and educational question more than one of material interests, thinking that it ought to be decided mainly by the consideration, what great improvement in life and culture stands next in order for the people concerned, as the condition of their further progress, and what institutions are most likely to promote that; nevertheless, this change in the premises of my political philosophy did not alter my practical political creed as to the requirements of my own time and country. i was as much as ever a radical and democrat for europe, and especially for england. i thought the predominance of the aristocratic classes, the noble and the rich, in the english constitution, an evil worth any struggle to get rid of; not on account of taxes, or any such comparatively small inconvenience, but as the great demoralizing agency in the country. demoralizing, first, because it made the conduct of the government an example of gross public immorality, through the predominance of private over public interests in the state, and the abuse of the powers of legislation for the advantage of classes. secondly, and in a still greater degree, because the respect of the multitude always attaching itself principally to that which, in the existing state of society, is the chief passport to power; and under english institutions, riches, hereditary or acquired, being the almost exclusive source of political importance; riches, and the signs of riches, were almost the only things really respected, and the life of the people was mainly devoted to the pursuit of them. i thought, that while the higher and richer classes held the power of government, the instruction and improvement of the mass of the people were contrary to the self-interest of those classes, because tending to render the people more powerful for throwing off the yoke: but if the democracy obtained a large, and perhaps the principal share, in the governing power, it would become the interest of the opulent classes to promote their education, in order to ward off really mischievous errors, and especially those which would lead to unjust violations of property. on these grounds i was not only as ardent as ever for democratic institutions, but earnestly hoped that owenite, st. simonian, and all other anti-property doctrines might spread widely among the poorer classes; not that i thought those doctrines true, or desired that they should be acted on, but in order that the higher classes might be made to see that they had more to fear from the poor when uneducated than when educated.
again, in politics, though i no longer accepted the doctrine of my father's essay on government as a scientific theory, ceased to consider representative democracy as an absolute principle, and regarded it as a question of time, place, and circumstance, and now looked on the choice of political institutions as a moral and educational question more than one of material interests, thinking that it ought to be decided mainly by the question what great improvement in life and culture stands next in order for the people concerned, as the condition of their further progress, and what institutions are most likely to promote it?, this change in the premises of my political philosophy did not alter my practical political creed as to the requirements of my own time and country. i was as much as ever a radical and democrat for europe, and especially for england. i thought the predominance of the aristocratic classes the noble and the rich in the english constitution to be an evil worth any struggle to get rid of; not because of taxes or any such comparatively small inconvenience, but as the great demoralising agency in the country. demoralising (1) because it made the conduct of the government an example of gross public immorality, through the predominance of private over public interests in the state, and the abuse of the powers of legislation for the advantage of classes; and even more (2) because it meant that under english institutions hereditary or acquired riches were the almost exclusive source of political importance, so that riches and the signs of riches were almost the only things really respected (because the respect of the multitude always attaches itself principally to whatever is in the existing state of society the chief passport to power), with the result that the life of the people was mainly devoted to the pursuit of riches. while the higher and richer classes held the power of government (i thought), the instruction and improvement of the mass of the people were contrary to the self-interest of those classes because they would tend to increase the people's power to throw off the yoke: but if the democracy obtained a large share perhaps the principal share in the governing power, it would become the interest of the opulent classes to promote their education, in order to ward off really mischievous errors, especially those that would lead to unjust violations of property. on these grounds not only was i as ardent as ever for democratic institutions, but i earnestly hoped that owenite, st. simonian, and all other anti-property doctrines might spread widely among the poorer classes. i did not think those doctrines to be true, or want them to be acted on; but i wanted to make the higher classes see that they had more to fear from the poor when uneducated than when educated.

in this frame of mind the french revolution of july found me: it roused my utmost enthusiasm, and gave me, as it were, a new existence. i went at once to paris, was introduced to lafayette, and laid the groundwork of the intercourse i afterwards kept up with several of the active chiefs of the extreme popular party. after my return i entered warmly, as a writer, into the political discussions of the time; which soon became still more exciting, by the coming in of lord grey's ministry, and the proposing of the reform bill. for the next few years i wrote copiously in newspapers. it was about this time that fonblanque, who had for some time written the political articles in the examiner, became the proprietor and editor of the paper. it is not forgotten with what verve and talent, as well as fine wit, he carried it on, during the whole period of lord grey's ministry, and what importance it assumed as the principal representative, in the newspaper press, of radical opinions. the distinguishing character of the paper was given to it entirely by his own articles, which formed at least three-fourths of all the original writing contained in it: but of the remaining fourth i contributed during those years a much larger share than anyone else. i wrote nearly all the articles on french subjects, including a weekly summary of french politics, often extending to considerable length; together with many leading articles on general politics, commercial and financial legislation, and any miscellaneous subjects in which i felt interested, and which were suitable to the paper, including occasional reviews of books. mere newspaper articles on the occurrences or questions of the moment, gave no opportunity for the development of any general mode of thought; but i attempted, in the beginning of 1831, to embody in a series of articles, headed the spirit of the age, some of my new opinions, and especially to point out in the character of the present age, the anomalies and evils characteristic of the transition from a system of opinions which had worn out, to another only in process of being formed. these articles, were, i fancy, lumbering in style, and not lively or striking enough to be, at any time, acceptable to newspaper readers; but had they been far more attractive, still, at that particular moment, when great political changes were impending, and engrossing all minds, these discussions were ill-timed, and missed fire altogether. the only effect which i know to have been produced by them, was that carlyle, then living in a secluded part of scotland, read them in his solitude, and, saying to himself (as he afterwards told me) here is a new mystic, inquired on coming to london that autumn respecting their authorship; an inquiry which was the immediate cause of our becoming personally acquainted.
return to political writing this is the frame of mind in which the french revolution of july 1830 found me. it aroused my utmost enthusiasm, and gave me a new existence, so to speak. i went at once to paris, was introduced to lafayette, and laid the groundwork for the contacts i afterwards kept up with several of the active chiefs of the extreme popular party. after my return i entered warmly, as a writer, into the political discussions of the time; which soon became still more exciting by the coming in of lord grey's ministry and the proposing of the reform bill. for the next few years i wrote copiously in newspapers. it was about this time that fonblanque, who had for some time written the political articles in the examiner, became that paper's proprietor and editor. people still remember the verve and talent, as well as the fine wit, with which he carried it on during the whole period of lord grey's ministry, and what importance it had as the newspaper press's principal representative of radical opinions. the distinguishing character of the examiner was given to it entirely by fonblanque's own articles, which constituted at least three-fourths of all the original writing contained in it; but of the remaining fourth i contributed during those years a much larger share than anyone else. i wrote nearly all the articles on french subjects, including a weekly summary often quite long of french politics; together with many leading articles on general politics, commercial and financial legislation, and any miscellaneous subjects in which i felt interested and which were suitable for the paper, including occasional reviews of books. mere newspaper articles on the occurrences or questions of the moment gave no opportunity for the development of any general mode of thought; but i tried at the start of 1831 to embody in a series of articles headed the spirit of the age some of my new opinions, and especially to point out in the character of the present age the anomalies and evils characteristic of the transition from a system of worn-out opinions to another still in the process of being formed. these articles were lumbering in style and not lively or striking enough to be acceptable to newspaper readers at any time; but even if they had been far more attractive, they would still have been ill-timed at that particular moment, when great political changes were impending and engrossing all minds; so my discussions missed fire altogether. the only effect that i know to have been produced by them was that carlyle, then living in a secluded part of scotland, read them in his solitude, said to himself (as he afterwards told me) here is a new mystic, and on coming to london that autumn asked who wrote them. that inquiry was the immediate cause of our becoming personally acquainted.

i have already mentioned carlyle's earlier writings as one of the channels through which i received the influences which enlarged my early narrow creed; but i do not think that those writings, by themselves, would ever have had any effect on my opinions. what truths they contained, though of the very kind which i was already receiving from other quarters, were presented in a form and vesture less suited than any other to give them access to a mind trained as mine had been. they seemed a haze of poetry and german metaphysics, in which almost the only clear thing was a strong animosity to most of the opinions which were the basis of my mode of thought; religious scepticism, utilitarianism, the doctrine of circumstances, and the attaching any importance to democracy, logic, or political economy. instead of my having been taught anything, in the first instance, by carlyle, it was only in proportion as i came to see the same truths through media more suited to my mental constitution, that i recognised them in his writings. then, indeed, the wonderful power with which he put them forth made a deep impression upon me, and i was during a long period one of his most fervent admirers; but the good his writings did me, was not as philosophy to instruct, but as poetry to animate. even at the time when our acquaintance commenced, i was not sufficiently advanced in my new modes of thought to appreciate him fully; a proof of which is, that on his showing me the manuscript of sartor resartus, his best and greatest work, which he just then finished, i made little of it; though when it came out about two years afterwards in fraser's magazine i read it with enthusiastic admiration and the keenest delight. i did not seek and cultivate carlyle less on account of the fundamental differences in our philosophy. he soon found out that i was not another mystic, and when for the sake of my own integrity i wrote to him a distinct profession of all those of my opinions which i knew he most disliked, he replied that the chief difference between us was that i was as yet consciously nothing of a mystic. i do not know at what period he gave up the expectation that i was destined to become one; but though both his and my opinions underwent in subsequent years considerable changes, we never approached much nearer to each other's modes of thought than we were in the first years of our acquaintance. i did not, however, deem myself a competent judge of carlyle. i felt that he was a poet, and that i was not; that he was a man of intuition, which i was not; and that as such, he not only saw many things long before me, which i could only, when they were pointed out to me, hobble after and prove, but that it was highly probable he could see many things which were not visible to me even after they were pointed out. i knew that i could not see round him, and could never be certain that i saw over him; and i never presumed to judge him with any definiteness, until he was interpreted to me by one greatly the superior of us both who was more a poet than he, and more a thinker than i whose own mind and nature included his, and infinitely more.
carlyle i have already mentioned carlyle's earlier writings as one of the channels through which i received the influences that broadened my early narrow creed; but i do not think that those writings by themselves would ever have had any effect on my opinions. what truths they contained, though of the very kind i was already receiving from other quarters, were presented in a form and clothing less suited than any other to give them access to a mind trained as mine had been. they seemed a haze of poetry and german metaphysics, in which almost the only clear thing was a strong animosity to most of the opinions that were the basis of my mode of thought: religious scepticism, utilitarianism, the doctrine of the formation of character by circumstances, and the attaching any importance to democracy, logic, or political economy. instead of my having been taught anything in the first instance by carlyle, it was only in proportion as i came to see the same truths through media more suited to my mental constitution that i recognised them in his writings. then indeed the wonderful power with which he expressed them made a deep impression on me, and for a long period i was one of his most fervent admirers; but the good his writings did me was not as philosophy to instruct but as poetry to animate. even at the time when our acquaintance started i was not advanced enough in my new modes of thought to appreciate him fully; a proof of which is that when he showed me the manuscript of his novel sartor resartus, his best and greatest work which he had just then finished, i made little of it, though when it came out about two years later as a serial in fraser's magazine i read it with enthusiastic admiration and the keenest delight. fundamental differences in our philosophies did not lead me to seek and cultivate carlyle less. he soon found out that i was not another mystic, and when for the sake of my own integrity i wrote to him a clear statement of the opinions of mine that i knew he most disliked, he replied that the chief difference between us was that i was as yet consciously nothing of a mystic. i do not know when he gave up the expectation that i was destined to become one; but though his and my opinions in later years underwent considerable changes, we never came much nearer to each other's modes of thought than we were in the first years of our acquaintance. but i did not regard myself as a competent judge of carlyle. i felt that he was a poet and i was not; that he was a man of intuition and i was not; and not only that as a man of intuition he saw many things long before i did, things that i could see hobble after and prove only when they were pointed out to me, but also that it was highly probable that he could see many things that were not visible to me even after they were pointed out. i knew that i could not see around him, and could never be certain that i saw over him; and i never presumed to judge him with any definiteness until he was interpreted to me by one greatly superior to us both, more a poet than carlyle and more a thinker than i, whose own mind and nature included his and infinitely more.

among the persons of intellect whom i had known of old, the one with whom i had now most points of agreement was the elder austin. i have mentioned that he always set himself in opposition to our early sectarianism; and latterly he had, like myself, come under new influences. having been appointed professor of jurisprudence in the london university (now university college), he had lived for some time at bonn to study for his lectures; and the influences of german literature and of the german character and state of society had made a very perceptible change in his views of life. his personal disposition was much softened; he was less militant and polemic; his tastes had begun to turn themselves towards the poetic and contemplative. he attached much less importance than formerly to outward changes; unless accompanied by a better cultivation of the inward nature. he had a strong distaste for the general meanness of english life, the absence of enlarged thoughts and unselfish desires, the low objects on which the faculties of all classes of the english are intent. even the kind of public interests which englishmen care for, he held in very little esteem. he thought that there was more practical good government, and (which is true enough) infinitely more care for the education and mental improvement of all ranks of the people, under the prussian monarchy, than under the english representative government: and he held, with the french economistes, that the real security for good government is un peuple eclaire, which is not always the fruit of popular institutions, and which, if it could be had without them, would do their work better than they. though he approved of the reform bill, he predicted, what in fact occurred, that it would not produce the great immediate improvements in government which many expected from it. the men, he said, who could do these great things did not exist in the country. there were many points of sympathy between him and me, both in the new opinions he had adopted and in the old ones which he retained. like me, he never ceased to be a utilitarian, and, with all his love for the germans and enjoyment of their literature, never became in the smallest degree reconciled to the innate-principle metaphysics. he cultivated more and more a kind of german religion, a religion of poetry and feeling with little, if anything, of positive dogma; while in politics (and here it was that i most differed with him) he acquired an indifference, bordering on contempt, for the progress of popular institutions: though he rejoiced in that of socialism, as the most effectual means of compelling the powerful classes to educate the people, and to impress on them the only real means of permanently improving their material condition, a limitation of their numbers. neither was he, at this time, fundamentally opposed to socialism in itself as an ultimate result of improvement. he professed great disrespect for what he called the universal principles of human nature of the political economists, and insisted on the evidence which history and daily experience afford of the extraordinary pliability of human nature (a phrase which i have somewhere borrowed from him); nor did he think it possible to set any positive bounds to the moral capabilities which might unfold themselves in mankind, under an enlightened direction of social and educational influences. whether he retained all these opinions to the end of life i know not. certainly the modes of thinking of his later years, and especially of his last publication, were much more tory in their general character than those which he held at this time.
among the persons of intellect whom i had known of old, the one i now had most points of agreement with was the elder austin. i have mentioned that he always set himself in opposition to our early sectarianism; and latterly he had come under new influences, as had i. having been appointed professor of jurisprudence in the london university (now university college), he had lived for some time at bonn to study for his lectures; and the influences of german literature and of the german character and state of society had made a very perceptible change in his views of life. his personal disposition was much softened; he was less militant and polemic; his tastes had begun to turn themselves towards the poetic and contemplative. he attached much less importance than formerly to outward changes unless they were accompanied by a better cultivation of the inward nature. he had a strong distaste for the general meanness of english life, the absence of enlarged thoughts and unselfish desires, the low objects on which the faculties of all classes of the english are intent. he held in very little esteem the kind of public interests that englishmen care for. he thought that under the prussian monarchy there was more practical good government and (which is true enough) infinitely more care for the education and mental improvement of all ranks of the people than there is under the english representative government; and he agreed with the french economistes that the real security for good government is un peuple eclaire, which is not always the fruit of popular institutions and would do such institutions work better than they do if it i.e. an enlightened populace could be had without them. though he approved of the reform bill, he predicted (correctly) that it would not produce the great immediate improvements in government that many expected from it. the men who could do these great things, he said, did not exist in the country. there were many points of sympathy between him and me, both in the new opinions he had adopted and in the old ones he retained. like me, he never ceased to be an utilitarian, and with all his love of the germans and enjoyment of their literature he never became in the smallest degree reconciled to the innate-principle metaphysics. he cultivated more and more a kind of german religion, a religion of poetry and feeling with little if any positive dogma; while in politics (which is where i most differed with him) he acquired an indifference bordering on contempt for the progress of popular institutions; though he rejoiced in the progress of socialism, as the most effective means of compelling the powerful classes to educate the people and to impress on them the only real means of permanently improving their material condition, namely a limitation of their numbers. he was not at this time fundamentally opposed to socialism in itself as an ultimate result of improvement. he professed great disrespect for what he called the universal principles of human nature of the political economists, and insisted on the evidence that history and daily experience provide of the extraordinary pliability of human nature (a phrase that i have somewhere borrowed from him), nor did he think it possible to set any definite limits to the moral capabilities that might unfold themselves in mankind under an enlightened direction of social and educational influences. whether he retained all these opinions to the end of his life i do not know. certainly the modes of thinking of his later years, and especially of his last publication, were much more tory in their general character than the ones he held at this time.

my father's tone of thought and feeling, i now felt myself at a great distance from: greater, indeed, than a full and calm explanation and reconsideration on both sides, might have shown to exist in reality. but my father was not one with whom calm and full explanations on fundamental points of doctrine could be expected, at least with one whom he might consider as, in some sort, a deserter from his standard. fortunately we were almost always in strong agreement on the political questions of the day, which engrossed a large part of his interest and of his conversation. on those matters of opinion on which we differed, we talked little. he knew that the habit of thinking for myself, which his mode of education had fostered, sometimes led me to opinions different from his, and he perceived from time to time that i did not always tell him how different. i expected no good, but only pain to both of us, from discussing our differences: and i never expressed them but when he gave utterance to some opinion or feeling repugnant to mine, in a manner which would have made it disingenuousness on my part to remain silent.
i now felt myself to be at a great distance from my father's tone of thought and feeling greater, indeed, than a full and calm explanation and reconsideration on both sides might have shown to exist in reality. but my father was not one with whom calm and full explanations on fundamental points of doctrine could be expected, at least with someone he might regard as (in a way) a deserter from his standard. fortunately we were almost always in strong agreement on the political questions of the day that engrossed a large part of his interest and conversation. we talked little about the matters of opinion on which we differed. he knew that the habit of thinking for myself, which his mode of education had fostered, sometimes led me to opinions different from his, and he perceived from time to time that i did not always tell him how different. i expected no good from discussing our differences, but only pain to both of us; and i never expressed them except when he gave utterance to some opinion or feeling repugnant to mine in a manner that would have made it dishonest for me to remain silent. my other writings at that time

it remains to speak of what i wrote during these years, which, independently of my contributions to newspapers, was considerable. in 1830 and 1831 i wrote the five essays since published under the title of essays on some unsettled questions of political economy, almost as they now stand, except that in 1833 i partially rewrote the fifth essay. they were written with no immediate purpose of publication; and when, some years later, i offered them to a publisher, he declined them. they were only printed in 1844, after the success of the system of logic. i also resumed my speculations on this last subject, and puzzled myself, like others before me, with the great paradox of the discovery of new truths by general reasoning. as to the fact, there could be no doubt. as little could it be doubted, that all reasoning is resolvable into syllogisms, and that in every syllogism the conclusion is actually contained and implied in the premises. how, being so contained and implied, it could be new truth, and how the theorems of geometry, so different in appearance from the definitions and axioms, could be all contained in these, was a difficulty which no, one, i thought, had sufficiently felt, and which, at all events, no one had succeeded in clearing up. the explanations offered by whately and others, though they might give a temporary satisfaction, always, in my mind, left a mist still hanging over the subject. at last, when reading a second or third time the chapters on reasoning in the second volume of dugald stewart, interrogating myself on every point, and following out, as far as i knew how, every topic of thought which the book suggested, i came upon an idea of his respecting the use of axioms in ratiocination, which i did not remember to have before noticed, but which now, in meditating on it, seemed to me not only true of axioms, but of all general propositions whatever, and to be the key of the whole perplexity. from this germ grew the theory of the syllogism propounded in the second book of the logic; which i immediately fixed by writing it out. and now, with greatly increased hope of being able to produce a work on logic, of some originality and value, i proceeded to write the first book, from the rough and imperfect draft i had already made. what i now wrote became the basis of that part of the subsequent treatise; except that it did not contain the theory of kinds, which was a later addition, suggested by otherwise inextricable difficulties which met me in my first attempt to work out the subject of some of the concluding chapters of the third book. at the point which i had now reached i made a halt, which lasted five years. i had come to the end of my tether; i could make nothing satisfactory of induction, at this time. i continued to read any book which seemed to promise light on the subject, and appropriated, as well as i could, the results; but for a long time i found nothing which seemed to open to me any very important vein of meditation.
it remains to speak of what i wrote during these years, which independently of my contributions to newspapers was considerable. in 1830 and 1831 i wrote the five essays since published under the title of essays on some unsettled questions of political economy, almost as they now stand except that in 1833 i partially rewrote the fifth essay. they were written with no immediate purpose of publication; and when some years later i offered them to a publisher, he declined them. they were not printed until 1844, after the success of the system of logic. i also returned to thinking about logic, and like others before me puzzled over the great paradox of the discovery of new truths by general reasoning. as to the fact that new truths are discovered in this way there could be no doubt. as little could it be doubted that all reasoning is resolvable into syllogisms, and that in every syllogism the conclusion is actually contained and implied in the premises. so: how could the conclusion, being so contained and implied, be a new truth? and how could the theorems of geometry, so different in appearance from the definitions and axioms, be all contained in them? this, i thought, was a difficulty that no-one had sufficiently felt, and that anyway no-one had succeeded in clearing up. the explanations offered by whately and others, though they might give a temporary satisfaction, always left in my mind a mist still hanging over the subject. at last, when reading for a second or third time the chapters on reasoning in the volume 2 of dugald stewart's elements of the philosophy of the human mind, interrogating myself on every point and following out as far as i could every topic of thought that the book suggested, i came upon an idea of his about the use of axioms in reasoning which i did not remember having noticed before but which now seemed to me when i meditated on it to be true not only of axioms but of all general propositions whatever, and to be the key of the whole perplexity. from this germ grew the theory of the syllogism propounded in book ii of my system of logic, which i immediately fixed by writing it out. and now, with greatly increased hope of being able to produce a work on logic of some originality and value, i proceeded to write book i from the rough and imperfect draft i had already made. what i now wrote became the basis of that part of the subsequent treatise, except that it did not contain the theory of kinds, which was a later addition suggested by otherwise inextricable difficulties that met me in my first attempt to work out the subject of some of the concluding chapters of book iii. at the point i had now reached i made a halt, which lasted five years. i had come to the end of my tether; i could make nothing satisfactory of induction at this time. i continued to read any book that seemed to promise light on the subject, and appropriated the results as well as i could; but for a long time i found nothing that seemed to open to me any important vein of meditation.

in 1832 i wrote several papers for the first series of tait's magazine, and one for a quarterly periodical called the jurist, which had been founded, and for a short time carried on, by a set of friends, all lawyers and law reformers, with several of whom i was acquainted. the paper in question is the one on the rights and duties of the state respecting corporation and church property, now standing first among the collected dissertations and discussions; where one of my articles in tait, the currency juggle, also appears. in the whole mass of what i wrote previous to these, there is nothing of sufficient permanent value to justify reprinting. the paper in the jurist, which i still think a very complete discussion of the rights of the state over foundations, showed both sides of my opinions, asserting as firmly as i should have done at any time, the doctrine that all endowments are national property, which the government may and ought to control; but not, as i should once have done, condemning endowments in themselves, and proposing that they should be taken to pay off the national debt. on the contrary, i urged strenuously the importance of a provision for education, not dependent on the mere demand of the market, that is, on the knowledge and discernment of average parents, but calculated to establish and keep up a higher standard of instruction than is likely to be spontaneously demanded by the buyers of the article. all these opinions have been confirmed and strengthened by the whole of my subsequent reflections.
in 1832 i wrote several papers for the first series of tait's magazine, and one for a quarterly periodical called the jurist, which had been founded (and for a short time was carried on) by a set of friends all lawyers and law reformers with several of whom i was acquainted. the paper in question is the one on the rights and duties of the state respecting the property of corporations and churches. it now stands first among the collected dissertations and discussions, where one of my articles in tait, the currency juggle, also appears. in the whole mass of what i wrote previous to these, there is nothing with enough permanent value to justify reprinting. the paper in the jurist, which i still think a very complete discussion of the rights of the state over foundations, showed both sides of my opinions. it asserted as firmly as i would have done at any time that all endowments are national property that the government may and ought to control; but it did not, as i would once have done, condemn endowments as such and propose that they should be taken to pay off the national debt. on the contrary, i urged strenuously the importance of having a provision for education that doesn't depend on the mere demand of the market, i.e. on the knowledge and discernment of average parents, but is designed to establish and maintain a higher standard of instruction than is likely to be spontaneously demanded by the buyers of the article. all these opinions have been confirmed and strengthened by the whole course of my subsequent reflections.

commencement of the most valuable friendship of my life. my fathers death. writings and other proceedings up to 1840.
part 6: start of the most valuable friendship of my life. my father's death. writings and other doings up to 1840

it was the period of my mental progress which i have now reached that i formed the friendship which has been the honour and chief blessing of my existence, as well as the source of a great part of all that i have attempted to do, or hope to effect hereafter, for human improvement. my first introduction to the lady who, after a friendship of twenty years, consented to become my wife, was in 1830, when i was in my twenty-fifth and she in her twenty-third year. with her husband's family it was the renewal of an old acquaintanceship. his grandfather lived in the next house to my father's in newington green, and i had sometimes when a boy been invited to play in the old gentleman's garden. he was a fine specimen of the old scotch puritan; stern, severe, and powerful, but very kind to children, on whom such men make a lasting impression. although it was years after my introduction to mrs. taylor before my acquaintance with her became at all intimate or confidential, i very soon felt her to be the most admirable person i had ever known. it is not to be supposed that she was, or that any one, at the age at which i first saw her, could be, all that she afterwards became. least of all could this be true of her, with whom self-improvement, progress in the highest and in all senses, was a law of her nature; a necessity equally from the ardour with which she sought it, and from the spontaneous tendency of faculties which could not receive an impression or an experience without making it the source or the occasion of an accession of wisdom. up to the time when i first saw her, her rich and powerful nature had chiefly unfolded itself according to the received type of feminine genius. to her outer circle she was a beauty and a wit, with an air of natural distinction, felt by all who approached her: to the inner, a woman of deep and strong feeling, of penetrating and intuitive intelligence, and of an eminently meditative and poetic nature. married at an early age to a most upright, brave, and honourable man, of liberal opinions and good education, but without the intellectual or artistic tastes which would have made him a companion for her, though a steady and affectionate friend, for whom she had true esteem and the strongest affection through life, and whom she most deeply lamented when dead; shut out by the social disabilities of women from any adequate exercise of her highest faculties in action on the world without; her life was one of inward meditation, varied by familiar intercourse with a small circle of friends, of whom one only (long since deceased) was a person of genius, or of capacities of feeling or intellect kindred with her own, but all had more or less of alliance with her in sentiments and opinions. into this circle i had the good fortune to be admitted, and i soon perceived that she possessed in combination, the qualities which in all other persons whom i had known i had been only too happy to find singly. in her, complete emancipation from every kind of superstition (including that which attributes a pretended perfection to the order of nature and the universe), and an earnest protest against many things which are still part of the established constitution of society, resulted not from the hard intellect, but from strength of noble and elevated feeling, and co-existed with a highly reverential nature. in general spiritual characteristics, as well as in temperament and organisation, i have often compared her, as she was at this time, to shelley: but in thought and intellect, shelley, so far as his powers were developed in his short life, was but a child compared with what she ultimately became. alike in the highest regions of speculation and in the smaller practical concerns of daily life, her mind was the same perfect instrument, piercing to the very heart and marrow of the matter; always seizing the essential idea or principle. the same exactness and rapidity of operation, pervading as it did her sensitive as well as her mental faculties, would, with her gifts of feeling and imagination, have fitted her to be a consummate artist, as her fiery and tender soul and her vigorous eloquence would certainly have made her a great orator, and her profound knowledge of human nature and discernment and sagacity in practical life, would, in the times when such a carriere was open to women, have made her eminent among the rulers of mankind. her intellectual gifts did but minister to a moral character at once the noblest and the best balanced which i have ever met with in life. her unselfishness was not that of a taught system of duties, but of a heart which thoroughly identified itself with the feelings of others, and often went to excess in consideration for them by imaginatively investing their feelings with the intensity of its own. the passion of justice might have been thought to be her strongest feeling, but for her boundless generosity, and a lovingness ever ready to pour itself forth upon any or all human beings who were capable of giving the smallest feeling in return. the rest of her moral characteristics were such as naturally accompany these qualities of mind and heart: the most genuine modesty combined with the loftiest pride; a simplicity and sincerity which were absolute, towards all who were fit to receive them; the utmost scorn of whatever was mean and cowardly, and a burning indignation at everything brutal or tyrannical, faithless or dishonourable in conduct and character, while making the broadest distinction between mala in se and mere mala prohibita between acts giving evidence of intrinsic badness in feeling and character, and those which are only violations of conventions either good or bad, violations which, whether in themselves right or wrong, are capable of being committed by persons in every other respect lovable or admirable.
i have now reached the period of my mental progress when i formed the friendship that has been the honour and chief blessing of my existence, as well as the source of a great part of all that i have tried to do or hope to achieve hereafter for human improvement. my first introduction to the lady who after a friendship of twenty years consented to become my wife was in 1830, when i was in my 25th and she in her 23rd year. with her husband's family it was the renewal of an old acquaintanceship. his grandfather lived in the next house to my father's in newington green, and as a boy i had sometimes been invited to play in the old gentleman's garden. he was a fine specimen of the old scotch puritan: stern, severe, and powerful, but very kind to children, on whom such men make a lasting impression. although it was years after my introduction to mrs taylor before my acquaintance with her became at all close or confidential, i very soon felt her to be the most admirable person i had ever known. it is not to be supposed that she was then all that she afterwards became no-one at the age of 23 could be. least of all could this be true of her with whom self-improvement progress in the highest sense and in all senses was a law of her nature, made necessary equally by the ardour with which she sought it and the spontaneous tendency of faculties that could not receive an impression or an experience without making it the source or the occasion of a gain in wisdom. up to the time when i first saw her, her rich and powerful nature had chiefly unfolded itself according to the accepted patterns of feminine skill. to her outer circle she was a beauty and a wit, with an air of natural distinction that was felt by all who approached her: to the inner circle she was a woman of deep and strong feeling, of penetrating and intuitive intelligence, and of an eminently meditative and poetic nature. married at a very early age to a most upright, brave, and honourable man, of liberal opinions and good education, but without the intellectual or artistic tastes which would have made him a companion for her. but he was a steady and affectionate friend for whom she had true esteem and the strongest affection through life and whom she most deeply lamented when dead. shut out by the social disabilities of women from any adequate exercise of her highest faculties in action on the outside world, her life was one of inward meditation, varied by familiar contacts with a small circle of friends. only one of these (long since deceased) had capacities of feeling or intellect kindred with her own, but all had more or less alliance with her in sentiments and opinions. i had the good fortune to be admitted into this circle, and i soon saw that she possessed in combination the qualities which in everyone else i had known i had been only too happy to find singly. in her, complete emancipation from every kind of superstition (including that which attributes a suppose perfection to the order of nature and the universe) and an earnest protest against many things that are still part of the established constitution of society resulted not from hard intellect but from strength of noble and elevated feeling, and co-existed with a highly reverential nature. in general spiritual characteristics, as well as in temperament and organisation, i have often compared her (as she was at this time) to shelley; but in thought and intellect shelley so far as his powers were developed in his short life was a mere child compared with what she ultimately became. alike in the highest regions of speculation and in the smaller practical concerns of daily life, her mind was the same perfect instrument, piercing to the very heart and marrow of the matter; always seizing the essential idea or principle. the same exactness and speed of operation, pervading as it did her sensitive as well as her mental faculties, would with her gifts of feeling and imagination have fitted her to be a consummate artist. her fiery and tender soul and her vigorous eloquence would certainly have made her a great orator. her profound knowledge of human nature and her discernment and sagacity in practical life would, in the times when such a career was open to women, have made her eminent among the rulers of mankind. her intellectual gifts were in the service of the noblest and the best balanced moral character i have ever met with. her unselfishness was not that of a taught system of duties, but of a heart that thoroughly identified itself with the feelings of others, and often went to excess in consideration for them by imaginatively investing their feelings with the intensity of its own. the passion for justice might have been thought to be her strongest feeling if it weren't for her boundless generosity and a lovingness ever ready to pour itself forth on any human beings capable of giving the smallest feeling in return. her other moral characteristics were such as naturally accompany these qualities of mind and heart: the most genuine modesty combined with the loftiest pride; an absolute simplicity and sincerity towards all who were fit to receive them; the utmost scorn for whatever was mean and cowardly, and a burning indignation at everything brutal or tyrannical, faithless or dishonourable in conduct and character, while making the broadest distinction between mala in se and mere mala prohibita i.e. between acts giving evidence of intrinsic badness in feeling and character, and acts that are only violations of conventions either good or bad, violations which, whether in themselves right or wrong, could be committed by persons who were in every other respect lovable or admirable.

with those who, like all the best and wisest of mankind, are dissatisfied with human life as it is, and whose feelings are wholly identified with its radical amendment, there are two main regions of thought. one is the region of ultimate aims; the constituent elements of the highest realizable ideal of human life. the other is that of the immediately useful and practically attainable. in both these departments, i have acquired more from her teaching, than from all other sources taken together. and, to say truth, it is in these two extremes principally, that real certainty lies. my own strength lay wholly in the uncertain and slippery intermediate region, that of theory, or moral and political science: respecting the conclusions of which, in any of the forms in which i have received or originated them, whether as political economy, analytic psychology, logic, philosophy of history, or anything else, it is not the least of my intellectual obligations to her that i have derived from her a wise scepticism, which, while it has not hindered me from following out the honest exercise of my thinking faculties to whatever conclusions might result from it, has put me on my guard against holding or announcing these conclusions with a degree of confidence which the nature of such speculations does not warrant, and has kept my mind not only open to admit, but prompt to welcome and eager to seek, even on the questions on which i have most meditated, any prospect of clearer perceptions and better evidence. i have often received praise, which in my own right i only partially deserve, for the greater practicality which is supposed to be found in my writings, compared with those of most thinkers who have been equally addicted to large generalizations. the writings in which this quality has been observed, were not the work of one mind, but of the fusion of two, one of them as pre-eminently practical in its judgments and perceptions of things present, as it was high and bold in its anticipations for a remote futurity. at the present period, however, this influence was only one among many which were helping to shape the character of my future development: and even after it became, i may truly say, the presiding principle of my mental progress, it did not alter the path, but only made me move forward more boldly, and, at the same time, more cautiously, in the same course. the only actual revolution which has ever taken place in my modes of thinking, was already complete. my new tendencies had to be confirmed in some respects, moderated in others: but the only substantial changes of opinion that were yet to come, related to politics, and consisted, on one hand, in a greater approximation, so far as regards the ultimate prospects of humanity, to a qualified socialism, and on the other, a shifting of my political ideal from pure democracy, as commonly understood by its partisans, to the modified form of it, which is set forth in my considerations on representative government.
to be admitted into any degree of mental contact with a being who had these qualities was bound to have a most beneficial influence on my development; though the effect was only gradual, and many years passed before her mental progress and mine went forward in the complete companionship they eventually achieved. the benefit i received was far greater than any i could hope to give; though to her who had at first reached her opinions by the moral intuition of a character with strong feelings there was doubtless help as well as encouragement to be derived from one who had arrived at many of the same results by study and reasoning; and in the rapidity of her intellectual growth, her mental activity in converting everything into knowledge, doubtless drew many of its materials from me, as from other sources. if i went into details, i could go on indefinitely about what i owe to her, even just about what i owe intellectually to her; a few words will give some idea, though a very imperfect one, of its general character. among those who are (like all the best and wisest of mankind) dissatisfied with human life as it is, and whose feelings are wholly identified with its radical amendment, there are two main regions of thought: (a) the region of ultimate aims, the constituent elements of the highest realisable ideal of human life, and (b) the region of the immediately useful and practically attainable. in both these departments i have gained more from her teaching than from all other sources taken together. real certainty lies principally in these two extremes, whereas my own strength lay wholly in the uncertain and slippery intermediate region, that of theory, or moral and political science. not the least of my intellectual obligations to mrs taylor is that i have derived from her a wise scepticism about conclusions mine or anyone else's in that intermediate region, in political economy, analytic psychology, logic, philosophy of history, or anything else. this scepticism has not hindered me from following out the honest exercise of my thinking faculties to whatever conclusions might result from it, but it has put me on my guard against holding or announcing these conclusions with more confidence than the nature of such theories can justify, and has kept my mind not only open to admit but prompt to welcome and eager to seek any prospect of clearer perceptions and better evidence, even on the questions on which i have most meditated. i have often received praise, which in my own right i only partially deserve, for the greater practicality which is supposed to be found in my writings compared with those of most thinkers who have been equally addicted to large generalisations. the writings in which this quality has been observed were the work not of one mind but of the fusion of two, one of them as pre-eminently (b) practical in its judgments and perceptions of things present as it was (a) high and bold in its anticipations for a remote futurity.

this last change, which took place very gradually, dates its commencement from my reading, or rather study, of m. de tocqueville's democracy in america, which fell into my hands immediately after its first appearance. in that remarkable work, the excellences of democracy were pointed out in a more conclusive, because a more specific manner than i had ever known them to be, even by the most enthusiastic democrats; while the specific dangers which beset democracy, considered as the government of the numerical majority, were brought into equally strong light, and subjected to a masterly analysis, not as reasons for resisting what the author considered as an inevitable result of human progress, but as indications of the weak points of popular government, the defences by which it needs to be guarded, and the correctives which must be added to it in order that while full play is given to its beneficial tendencies, those which are of a different nature may be neutralized or mitigated. i was now well prepared for speculations of this character, and from this time onward my own thoughts moved more and more in the same channel, though the consequent modifications in my practical political creed were spread over many years, as would be shown by comparing my first review of democracy in america, written and published in 1835, with the one in 1840 (reprinted in the dissertations), and this last, with the considerations on representative government.
at the time of which i am writing, however, this influence was only one among many that were helping to shape the character of my future development; and even after it became (i may truly say) the chief driver of my mental progress, it did not alter the path i followed but only made me move along it more boldly and at the same time more cautiously. the only actual revolution that has ever taken place in my modes of thinking was already complete. my new tendencies had to be confirmed in some respects, moderated in others, but the only substantial changes of opinion that were yet to come related to politics. they consisted in a greater approximation, so far as regards the ultimate prospects of humanity, to a qualified socialism, and a shifting of my political ideal from pure democracy as commonly understood by its partisans to the modified form of it that is presented in my considerations on representative government. this last change, which took place very gradually, started with my reading, or rather studying, m. de tocqueville's democracy in america, which fell into my hands immediately after its first appearance. in that remarkable work the excellences of democracy were pointed out in a more conclusive because more specific manner than i had ever known them to be, even by the most enthusiastic democrats; while the specific dangers that beset democracy, considered as the government of the numerical majority, were brought into equally strong light and subjected to a masterly analysis, not as reasons for resisting what the author considered as an inevitable result of human progress, but as indications of the weak points of popular government, the defences by which it needs to be guarded, and the correctives that must be added to it in order that while full play is given to its beneficial tendencies its harmful tendencies may be neutralised or mitigated. i was now well prepared for theorising of this sort, and from this time onward my own thoughts moved increasingly in the same channel, though the consequent modifications in my practical political creed were spread over many years, as would be shown by comparing my first review of democracy in america in 1835 with the one in 1840 (reprinted in the dissertations), and comparing the latter with my considerations on representative government.

a collateral subject on which also i derived great benefit from the study of tocqueville, was the fundamental question of centralization. the powerful philosophic analysis which he applied to american and to french experience, led him to attach the utmost importance to the performance of as much of the collective business of society, as can safely be so performed, by the people themselves, without any intervention of the executive government, either to supersede their agency, or to dictate the manner of its exercise. he viewed this practical political activity of the individual citizen, not only as one of the most effectual means of training the social feelings and practical intelligence of the people, so important in themselves and so indispensable to good government, but also as the specific counteractive to some of the characteristic infirmities of democracy, and a necessary protection against its degenerating into the only despotism of which, in the modern world, there is real danger the absolute rule of the head of the executive over a congregation of isolated individuals, all equals but all slaves. there was, indeed, no immediate peril from this source on the british side of the channel, where nine-tenths of the internal business which elsewhere devolves on the government, was transacted by agencies independent of it; where centralization was, and is, the subject not only of rational disapprobation, but of unreasoning prejudice; where jealousy of government interference was a blind feeling preventing or resisting even the most beneficial exertion of legislative authority to correct the abuses of what pretends to be local self-government, but is, too often, selfish mismanagement of local interests, by a jobbing and borne local oligarchy. but the more certain the public were to go wrong on the side opposed to centralization, the greater danger was there lest philosophic reformers should fall into the contrary error, and overlook the mischiefs of which they had been spared the painful experience. i was myself, at this very time, actively engaged in defending important measures, such as the great poor law reform of 1834, against an irrational clamour grounded on the anti-centralization prejudice: and had it not been for the lessons of tocqueville, i do not know that i might not, like many reformers before me, have been hurried into the excess opposite to that, which, being the one prevalent in my own country, it was generally my business to combat. as it is, i have steered carefully between the two errors, and whether i have or have not drawn the line between them exactly in the right place, i have at least insisted with equal emphasis upon the evils on both sides, and have made the means of reconciling the advantages of both, a subject of serious study.
a related subject on which also i derived great benefit from the study of tocqueville was the fundamental question of centralisation. the powerful philosophic analysis that he applied to american and to french experience led him to attach the utmost importance to having the collective business of society performed, as far as this can safely be done, by the people themselves, without executive government's intervening to supersede their agency or to dictate the manner of its exercise. he regarded this practical political activity of the individual citizen not only as one of the most effective means of training the social feelings and practical intelligence of the people so important in themselves and so indispensable to good government but also as the specific counteractive to some of the characteristic infirmities of democracy, and a necessary protection against its degenerating into the only despotism that there is real danger of in the modern world, namely the absolute rule of the head of the executive over a congregation of isolated individuals, all equals but all slaves. there was indeed no immediate peril from this source on the british side of the channel, where 90% of the internal business that is elsewhere done by the government was transacted by agencies independent of it; where centralisation was (and still is) the subject not only of rational disapproval but of unreasoning prejudice; where resentment of government interference was a blind feeling preventing or resisting even the most beneficial exertion of legislative authority to correct the abuses of what pretends to be local self-government but too often is really the selfish mismanagement of local interests by a jobbing and borne local oligarchy. but the more certain the public were to go wrong on the anti-centralisation side, the greater was the danger that philosophic reformers would fall into the contrary error and overlook the mischiefs of which they had been spared the painful experience. at this very time i was actively engaged in defending important measures, such as the great poor law reform of 1834, against an irrational clamour based on the anti-centralisation prejudice; and if it hadn't been for the lessons of tocqueville i think that i might, like many reformers before me, have been hurried into the excess opposite, i.e. into the prejudice which, being the one prevalent in my own country, it was generally my business to combat. as it is, i have steered carefully between the two errors, and whether or not i have drawn the line between them exactly in the right place i have at least insisted with equal emphasis on the evils on both sides and have seriously studied the means of reconciling the advantages of both.

in the meanwhile had taken place the election of the first reformed parliament, which included several of the most notable of my radical friends and acquaintances grote, roebuck, buller, sir william molesworth, john and edward romilly, and several more; besides warburton, strutt, and others, who were in parliament already. those who thought themselves, and were called by their friends, the philosophic radicals, had now, it seemed, a fair opportunity, in a more advantageous position than they had ever before occupied, for showing what was in them; and i, as well as my father, founded great hopes on them. these hopes were destined to be disappointed. the men were honest, and faithful to their opinions, as far as votes were concerned; often in spite of much discouragement. when measures were proposed, flagrantly at variance with their principles, such as the irish coercion bill, or the canada coercion in 1837, they came forward manfully, and braved any amount of hostility and prejudice rather than desert the right. but on the whole they did very little to promote any opinions; they had little enterprise, little activity: they left the lead of the radical portion of the house to the old hands, to hume and oconnell. a partial exception must be made in favour of one or two of the younger men; and in the case of roebuck, it is his title to permanent remembrance, that in the very first year during which he sat in parliament, he originated (or re-originated after the unsuccessful attempt of mr. brougham) the parliamentary movement for national education; and that he was the first to commence, and for years carried on almost alone, the contest for the self-government of the colonies. nothing, on the whole equal to these two things, was done by any other individual, even of those from whom most was expected. and now, on a calm retrospect, i can perceive that the men were less in fault than we supposed, and that we had expected too much from them. they were in unfavourable circumstances. their lot was cast in the ten years of inevitable reaction, when, the reform excitement being over, and the few legislative improvements which the public really called for having been rapidly effected, power gravitated back in its natural direction, to those who were for keeping things as they were; when the public mind desired rest, and was less disposed than at any other period since the peace, to let itself be moved by attempts to work up the reform feeling into fresh activity in favour of new things. it would have required a great political leader, which no one is to be blamed for not being, to have effected really great things by parliamentary discussion when the nation was in this mood. my father and i had hoped that some competent leader might arise; some man of philosophic attainments and popular talents, who could have put heart into the many younger or less distinguished men that would have been ready to join him could have made them available, to the extent of their talents, in bringing advanced ideas before the public could have used the house of commons as a rostra or a teacher's chair for instructing and impelling the public mind; and would either have forced the whigs to receive their measures from him, or have taken the lead of the reform party out of their hands. such a leader there would have been, if my father had been in parliament. for want of such a man, the instructed radicals sank into a mere cote gauche of the whig party. with a keen, and as i now think, an exaggerated sense of the possibilities which were open to the radicals if they made even ordinary exertion for their opinions, i laboured from this time till 1839, both by personal influence with some of them, and by writings, to put ideas into their heads, and purpose into their hearts. i did some good with charles buller, and some with sir william molesworth; both of whom did valuable service, but were unhappily cut off almost in the beginning of their usefulness. on the whole, however, my attempt was vain. to have had a chance of succeeding in it, required a different position from mine. it was a task only for one who, being himself in parliament, could have mixed with the radical members in daily consultation, could himself have taken the initiative, and instead of urging others to lead, could have summoned them to follow.
radicals in the first reformed parliament in the meantime there had occurred the election of the first reformed parliament, which included several of the most notable of my radical friends and acquaintances grote, roebuck, buller, sir william molesworth, john and edward romilly, and several more; besides warburton, strutt, and others who were in parliament already. those who thought of themselves as radicals and were so called by their friends, the philosophic radicals, now seemed to have a fair opportunity, in a more advantageous position than they had ever before occupied, for showing what was in them; and my father and i had great hopes of them. these hopes were destined to be disappointed. the men were honest, and faithful to their opinions so far as votes were concerned, often in spite of much discouragement. when measures were proposed that were flagrantly at variance with their principles such as the irish coercion bill, or the canada coercion bill in 1837 they came forward manfully and braved any amount of hostility and prejudice rather than desert the right. but on the whole they did very little to promote any opinions; they had little enterprise, little activity; they allowed the radical portion of the house to be led by the old hands, hume and oconnell. a partial exception must be made in favour of one or two of the younger men; and in the case of roebuck, it is his title to permanent remembrance that in his very first year as an mp he originated (or re-originated after the unsuccessful attempt of mr brougham) the parliamentary movement for national education; and that he was the first to launch and for years carried on almost alone the contest for the self-government of the colonies. nothing equal to these two things was done by any other individual, even of those from whom most was expected. and now on a calm retrospect i can see that the men were less at fault than we supposed, and that we had expected too much from them. they were in unfavourable circumstances. their lot was cast in the ten years of inevitable reaction, when the reform excitement was over and the few legislative improvements that the public really called for had been rapidly carried out, so that power gravitated back in its natural direction, to those who were for keeping things as they were; when the public mind wanted rest, and was less disposed than at any other period since the peace to let itself be moved by attempts to work up the reform feeling into fresh activity in favour of new things. to achieve really great things by parliamentary discussion when the nation was in this mood would have required a great political leader, and no-one is to be blamed for not being that. my father and i had hoped that some competent leader might arise; some man of philosophic attainments and popular talents who could have put heart into the many younger or less distinguished men who would have been ready to join him, could have made them available, to the extent of their talents, in bringing advanced ideas before the public, could have used the house of commons as a pulpit for instructing and impelling the public mind; and would either have forced the whigs to receive their measures from him, or have taken the lead of the reform party out of their hands. there would have been such a leader if my father had been in parliament. for lack of such a man, the educated radicals sank into a mere left wing of the whig party. with a keen sense (i now think an exaggerated sense) of the possibilities open to the radicals if they made even ordinary exertion for their opinions, i laboured from this time till 1839 by personal influence with some of them, and by writings to put ideas into their heads and purpose into their hearts. i did some good with charles buller, both of whom did valuable service but were unhappily cut off almost at the beginning of their usefulness. on the whole, however, my attempt was vain. success in it required a different position from mine. it was a task only for someone who, being himself in parliament, could have mixed with the radical members in daily consultation, could himself have taken the initiative and instead of urging others to lead could have summoned them to follow.

what i could do by writing, i did. during the year 1833 i continued working in the examiner with fonblanque who at that time was zealous in keeping up the fight for radicalism against the whig ministry. during the session of 1834 i wrote comments on passing events, of the nature of newspaper articles (under the title notes on the newspapers), in the monthly repository, a magazine conducted by mr. fox, well known as a preacher and political orator, and subsequently as member of parliament for oldham; with whom i had lately become acquainted, and for whose sake chiefly i wrote in his magazine. i contributed several other articles to this periodical, the most considerable of which (on the theory of poetry), is reprinted in the dissertations. altogether, the writings (independently of those in newspapers) which i published from 1832 to 1834, amount to a large volume. this, however, includes abstracts of several of plato's dialogues, with introductory remarks, which, though not published until 1834, had been written several years earlier; and which i afterwards, on various occasions, found to have been read, and their authorship known, by more people than were aware of anything else which i had written, up to that time. to complete the tale of my writings at this period, i may add that in 1833, at the request of bulwer, who was just then completing his england and the english (a work, at that time, greatly in advance of the public mind), i wrote for him a critical account of bentham's philosophy, a small part of which he incorporated in his text, and printed the rest (with an honourable acknowledgment), as an appendix. in this, along with the favourable, a part also of the unfavourable side of my estimation of bentham's doctrines, considered as a complete philosophy, was for the first time put into print.
my other writings at that time what i could do by writing, i did. during the year 1833 i continued working in the examiner with fonblanque, who at that time was zealous in keeping up the fight for radicalism against the whig ministry. during the parliamentary session of 1834 i wrote comments on passing events in the form of newspaper articles (under the title notes on the newspapers) in the monthly repository, a magazine conducted by mr fox well known as a preacher and political orator, and later as member of parliament for oldham with whom i had recently become acquainted and for whose sake chiefly i wrote in his magazine. i contributed several other articles to this periodical, the most considerable of which (on the theory of poetry) is reprinted in the dissertations. altogether the writings i published from 1832 to 1834 apart from those in newspapers amount to a large volume. but this includes abstracts of several of plato's dialogues, with introductory remarks, which had been written several years earlier though they were not published until 1834. (i afterwards found that they had been read, and their authorship known, by more people than were aware of anything else i had written up to that time.) to complete the tale of my writings at this period i may add that in 1833 at the request of bulwer just then completing his england and the english, a work greatly in advance of the public mind i wrote for him a critical account of bentham's philosophy, a small part of which he incorporated in his text, printing the rest (with an honourable acknowledgement) as an appendix. this was the first appearance in print of the favourable side as well as a part of the unfavourable side of my estimation of bentham's doctrines, considered as a complete philosophy.

was established to be the representative of the philosophic radicals, with most of whom i was now at issue on many essential points, and among whom i could not even claim to be the most important individual. my father's co-operation as a writer we all deemed indispensable, and he wrote largely in it until prevented by his last illness. the subjects of his articles, and the strength and decision with which his opinions were expressed in them, made the review at first derive its tone and colouring from him much more than from any of the other writers. i could not exercise editorial control over his articles, and i was sometimes obliged to sacrifice to him portions of my own. the old westminster review doctrines, but little modified, thus formed the staple of the review; but i hoped by the side of these, to introduce other ideas and another tone, and to obtain for my own shade of opinion a fair representation, along with those of other members of the party. with this end chiefly in view, i made it one of the peculiarities of the work that every article should bear an initial, or some other signature, and be held to express the opinions solely of the individual writer; the editor being only responsible for its being worth publishing and not in conflict with the objects for which the review was set on foot. i had an opportunity of putting in practice my scheme of conciliation between the old and the new philosophic radicalism, by the choice of a subject for my own first contribution. professor sedgwick, a man of eminence in a particular walk of natural science, but who should not have trespassed into philosophy, had lately published his discourse on the studies of cambridge, which had as its most prominent feature an intemperate assault on analytic psychology and utilitarian ethics, in the form of an attack on locke and paley. this had excited great indignation in my father and others, which i thought it fully deserved. and here, i imagined, was an opportunity of at the same time repelling an unjust attack, and inserting into my defence of hartleianism and utilitarianism a number of the opinions which constituted my view of those subjects, as distinguished from that of my old associates. in this i partially succeeded, though my relation to my father would have made it painful to me in any case, and impossible in a review for which he wrote, to speak out my whole mind on the subject at this time.
but an opportunity soon offered, by which, as it seemed, i might have it in my power to give more effective aid, and also stimulus to the philosophic radical party, than i had done until then. one of the projects occasionally talked of between my father and me and some of the parliamentary and other radicals who frequented his house was the founding of a journal of philosophic radicalism, to take the place the westminster review had been intended to fill; and the scheme had gone so far as to bring under discussion the monetary support that could be looked for, and the choice of an editor. nothing came of this for some time; but in the summer of 1834 sir william molesworth himself a hard-working student and a precise and metaphysical thinker, capable of aiding the cause by his pen as well as by his purse spontaneously proposed to establish a review, provided i would consent to be its real editor if i could not be publicly annouced as such. such a proposal was not to be refused; and the review was founded, at first under the title london review and later under that of the london and westminster review, molesworth having bought the westminster review from its proprietor, general thompson, and merged the two into one. in the years between 1834 and 1840 the conduct of this review occupied the greater part of my spare time. in the beginning it did not as a whole by any means represent my opinions. i had to concede much to my inevitable associates. the review was established to be the representative of the philosophic radicals, with most of whom i was now at issue on many essential points and among whom i could not even claim to be the most important individual. we all thought it essential to have my father's co-operation as a writer, and he wrote largely in it until prevented by his last illness. the subjects of his articles, and the strength and decision with which his opinions were expressed in them, made the review at first derive its tone and colouring from him much more than from any of the other writers. i could not exercise editorial control over his articles, and i was sometimes obliged to sacrifice to him portions of my own. the old westminster review doctrines, not much modified, thus formed the staple of the new review; but i hoped that along with these i could introduce other ideas and another tone, obtaining a fair representation for my own shade of opinion along with those of other members of the party. with this end chiefly in view, i made it a special feature of the work that every article should bear an initial or some other signature, and be held to express the opinions solely of the individual writer, the editor being only responsible for its being worth publishing and not in conflict with the objectives for which the review had been established. i had an opportunity to put into practice my scheme of conciliation between the old philosophic radicalism and the new by the choice of a subject for my own first contribution. professor sedgwick, a man of eminence in a particular walk of natural science, but who should not have trespassed into philosophy, had recently published his discourse on the studies of the university of cambridge, which had as its most prominent feature an intemperate assault on analytic psychology and utilitarian ethics, in the form of an attack on locke and paley. this had aroused great indignation in my father and others, which i thought it fully deserved. here, i thought, was an opportunity to repel an unjust attack and to insert into my defence of hartleianism and utilitarianism a number of the opinions that constituted my view of those subjects, as distinguished from the view of my old associates. in this i partially succeeded, though my relation to my father would have made it painful for me in any context, and impossible in a review to which he was also a contributor, to speak my whole mind on the subject at this time.

i am, however, inclined to think that my father was not so much opposed as he seemed, to the modes of thought in which i believed myself to differ from him; that he did injustice to his own opinions by the unconscious exaggerations of an intellect emphatically polemical; and that when thinking without an adversary in view, he was willing to make room for a great portion of the truths he seemed to deny. i have frequently observed that he made large allowance in practice for considerations which seemed to have no place in his theory. his fragment on mackintosh, which he wrote and published about this time, although i greatly admired some parts of it, i read as a whole with more pain than pleasure; yet on reading it again, long after, i found little in the opinions it contains, but what i think in the main just; and i can even sympathize in his disgust at the verbiage of mackintosh, though his asperity towards it went not only beyond what was judicious, but beyond what was even fair. one thing, which i thought, at the time, of good augury, was the very favourable reception he gave to tocqueville's democracy in america. it is true, he said and thought much more about what tocqueville said in favour of democracy, than about what he said of its disadvantages. still, his high appreciation of a book which was at any rate an example of a mode of treating the question of government almost the reverse of his wholly inductive and analytical, instead of purely ratiocinative gave me great encouragement. he also approved of an article which i published in the first number following the junction of the two reviews, the essay reprinted in the dissertations, under the title civilization; into which i threw many of my new opinions, and criticised rather emphatically the mental and moral tendencies of the time, on grounds and in a manner which i certainly had not learnt from him.
but i am inclined to think that my father was not so much opposed as he seemed to be to the modes of thought in which i believed myself to differ from him; that he did injustice to his own opinions by the unconscious exaggerations of an emphatically polemical intellect; and that when he was thinking without an adversary in view he was willing to make room for a great portion of the truths he seemed to deny. i have frequently observed that he made large allowance in practice for considerations that seemed to have no place in his theory. his fragment on mackintosh, which he wrote and published about this time, although i greatly admired some parts of it, i read as a whole with more pain than pleasure; yet on reading it again much later i found little in the opinions it contains that were not in the main just; and i can even sympathise with his disgust at the verbiage of mackintosh, though his asperity towards it went beyond what was judicious and even beyond what was fair. it was a good augury, i thought at the time, that he gave a very favourable reception to tocqueville's democracy in america. it is true that he said and thought much more about what tocqueville said in favour of democracy than about what he said of its disadvantages. still, his high appreciation for a book that was an example of a mode of treating the question of government almost the reverse of his wholly inductive and analytical, instead of purely ratiocinative gave me great encouragement. he also approved of an article that i published in the first number following the junction of the two reviews, the essay reprinted in the dissertations under the title civilisation; into which i threw many of my new opinions, and criticised rather emphatically the mental and moral tendencies of the time, doing this on grounds and in a manner that i certainly had not learned from him.

all speculation, however, on the possible future developments of my father's opinions, and on the probabilities of permanent co-operation between him and me in the promulgation of our thoughts, was doomed to be cut short. during the whole of 1835 his health had been declining: his symptoms became unequivocally those of pulmonary consumption, and after lingering to the last stage of debility, he died on the 23rd of june, 1836. until the last few days of his life there was no apparent abatement of intellectual vigour; his interest in all things and persons that had interested him through life was undiminished, nor did the approach of death cause the smallest wavering (as in so strong and firm a mind it was impossible that it should) in his convictions on the subject of religion. his principal satisfaction, after he knew that his end was near, seemed to be the thought of what he had done to make the world better than he found it; and his chief regret in not living longer, that he had not had time to do more.
my father's death all speculation on the possible future developments of my father's opinions, and on the probabilities of permanent co-operation between him and me in promulgating our thoughts, was doomed to be cut short. during the whole of 1835 his health had been declining; his symptoms became unequivocally those of pulmonary consumption, and after lingering to the last stage of debility he died on 23.vi.1836 at the age of 63. until the last few days of his life there was no apparent lessening of intellectual vigour; his interest in all things and persons that had interested him through life was undiminished, nor did the approach of death cause the smallest wavering in his convictions on the subject of religion. (in a mind as strong and firm as his it was impossible that it should.) after he knew that his end was near, his principal satisfaction seemed to be the thought of what he had done to make the world better than he found it, and his chief regret in not living longer was that he had not had time to do more.

his place is an eminent one in the literary, and even in the political history of his country; and it is far from honourable to the generation which has benefited by his worth, that he is so seldom mentioned, and, compared with men far his inferiors, so little remembered. this is probably to be ascribed mainly to two causes. in the first place, the thought of him merges too much in the deservedly superior fame of bentham. yet he was anything but bentham's mere follower or disciple. precisely because he was himself one of the most original thinkers of his time, he was one of the earliest to appreciate and adopt the most important mass of original thought which had been produced by the generation preceding him. his mind and bentham's were essentially of different construction. he had not all bentham's high qualities, but neither had bentham all his. it would, indeed, be ridiculous to claim for him the praise of having accomplished for mankind such splendid services as bentham's. he did not revolutionize, or rather create, one of the great departments of human thought. but, leaving out of the reckoning all that portion of his labours in which he benefited by what bentham had done, and counting only what he achieved in a province in which bentham had done nothing, that of analytic psychology, he will be known to posterity as one of the greatest names in that most important branch of speculation, on which all the moral and political sciences ultimately rest, and will mark one of the essential stages in its progress. the other reason which has made his fame less than he deserved, is that notwithstanding the great number of his opinions which, partly through his own efforts, have now been generally adopted, there was, on the whole, a marked opposition between his spirit and that of the present time. as brutus was called the last of the romans, so was he the last of the eighteenth century: he continued its tone of thought and sentiment into the nineteenth (though not unmodified nor unimproved), partaking neither in the good nor in the bad influences of the reaction against the eighteenth century, which was the great characteristic of the first half of the nineteenth. the eighteenth century was a great age, an age of strong and brave men, and he was a fit companion for its strongest and bravest. by his writings and his personal influence he was a great centre of light to his generation. during his later years he was quite as much the head and leader of the intellectual radicals in england, as voltaire was of the philosophes of france. it is only one of his minor merits, that he was the originator of all sound statesmanship in regard to the subject of his largest work, india. he wrote on no subject which he did not enrich with valuable thought, and excepting the elements of political economy, a very useful book when first written, but which has now for some time finished its work, it will be long before any of his books will be wholly superseded, or will cease to be instructive reading to students of their subjects. in the power of influencing by mere force of mind and character, the convictions and purposes of others, and in the strenuous exertion of that power to promote freedom and progress, he left, as far as my knowledge extends, no equal among men and but one among women.
his place is an eminent one in the literary and even in the political history of his country; and it is far from honourable to the generation which has benefited by his worth that he is so seldom mentioned and compared with men far his inferiors so little remembered. this is probably to be ascribed mainly to two causes. (1) the thought of him merges too much in the deservedly superior fame of bentham. yet he was anything but bentham's mere follower or disciple. precisely because he was himself one of the most original thinkers of his time, he was one of the earliest to appreciate and adopt the most important mass of original thought that had been produced by the generation preceding him. his mind and bentham's were essentially of different constructions. he had not all bentham's high qualities, but neither had bentham all his. it would indeed be ridiculous to claim for him the praise of having accomplished for mankind such splendid services as bentham's. he did not revolutionise or rather create one of the great departments of human thought. but, setting aside all that portion of his labours in which he benefited by what bentham had done, and counting only what he achieved in analytic psychology, a province in which bentham had done nothing, he will be known to posterity as one of the greatest names in that most important branch of theoretical endeavour, on which all the moral and political sciences ultimately rest, and will mark one of the essential stages in its progress. (2) the other reason why his fame has been less than he deserved is that despite the great number of his opinions that have now been generally adopted (partly through his own efforts), there was over-all a marked opposition between his spirit and that of the present time. as brutus was called the last of the romans, so was he the last of the 18th century: he continued its tone of thought and sentiment into the nineteenth (though modified and improved), partaking neither in the good nor in the bad influences of the reaction against the 18th century that was the great characteristic of the first half of the 19th. the 18th century was a great age, an age of strong and brave men, and he was a fit companion for its strongest and bravest. by his writings and his personal influence he was a great centre of light to his generation. during his later years he was quite as much the head and leader of the intellectual radicals in england as voltaire was of the philosophes of france. it is only one of his minor merits that he was the originator of all sound statesmanship concerning the subject of his largest work, india. he wrote on no subject that he did not enrich with valuable thought, and it will be long before any of his books will be wholly superseded, or will cease to be instructive reading to students of their subjects. (the one exception to this is his elements of political economy, a very useful book when first written, but which has now for some time finished its work thus putting itself out of date.) in the power of influencing the convictions and purposes of others by mere force of mind and character, and in the strenuous exertion of that power to promote freedom and progress, he left (as far as i know) no equal among men and only one among women.

widely to all writers who were in sympathy with progress as i understood it, even though i should lose by it the support of my former associates. carlyle, consequently became from this time a frequent writer in the review; sterling, soon after, an occasional one; and though each individual article continued to be the expression of the private sentiments of its writer, the general tone conformed in some tolerable degree to my opinions. for the conduct of the review, under, and in conjunction with me, i associated with myself a young scotchman of the name of robertson, who had some ability and information, much industry, and an active scheming head, full of devices for making the review more saleable, and on whose capacities in that direction i founded a good deal of hope: insomuch, that when molesworth, in the beginning of 1837, became tired of carrying on the review at a loss, and desirous of getting rid of it (he had done his part honourably, and at no small pecuniary cost,) i, very imprudently for my own pecuniary interest, and very much from reliance on robertson's devices, determined to continue it at my own risk, until his plans should have had a fair trial. the devices were good, and i never had any reason to change my opinion of them. but i do not believe that any devices would have made a radical and democratic review defray its expenses, including a paid editor or sub-editor, and a liberal payment to writers. i myself and several frequent contributors gave our labour gratuitously, as we had done for molesworth; but the paid contributors continued to be remunerated on the usual scale of the edinburgh and quarterly reviews; and this could not be done from the proceeds of the sale.
though intensely aware of my own inferiority in the qualities by which my father had acquired his personal ascendancy, i had now to try what it might be possible for me to accomplish without him: and the review was the instrument on which i built my chief hopes of establishing a useful influence over the liberal and democratic section of the public mind. deprived of my father's aid, i was also exempted from the restraints and reticences by which that aid had been purchased. i did not feel that there was any other radical writer or politician to whom i was bound to defer in any way that conflicted with my own opinions; and having the complete confidence of molesworth, i resolved henceforth to give full scope to my own opinions and modes of thought, and to open the review widely to all writers who were in sympathy with progress as i understood it, even if this cost me the support of my former associates. carlyle consequently became a frequent writer in the review from this time; sterling an occasional one, soon after; and though each individual article continued to be the expression of the private sentiments of its writer, the general tone conformed to a reasonable extent to my opinions. for the conduct of the review, under and in conjunction with me, i associated with myself a young scotchman of the name of robertson, who had some ability and information, much industry, and an active scheming head, full of devices for making the review more saleable. i based a good deal of hope on his capacities in that direction, so that when molesworth early in 1837 became tired of carrying on the review at a loss and wanting to get rid of it (he had done his part honourably, and at no small financial cost) i determined to continue it at my own risk until robertson's plans should have had a fair trial; this was very imprudent for my own financial interest, and was very much based on reliance on robertson's devices. the devices were good, and i never had any reason to change my opinion of them. but i do not believe that any devices would have made a radical and democratic review defray its expenses, including a paid editor or sub-editor and a liberal payment to writers. i myself and several frequent contributors gave our labour free, as we had done for molesworth; but the paid contributors continued to be paid on the usual scale of the edinburgh review and the quarterly review, and this could not be done from the proceeds of the sale.

in the same year, 1837, and in the midst of these occupations, i resumed the logic. i had not touched my pen on the subject for five years, having been stopped and brought to a halt on the threshold of induction. i had gradually discovered that what was mainly wanting, to overcome the difficulties of that branch of the subject, was a comprehensive, and, at the same time, accurate view of the whole circle of physical science, which i feared it would take me a long course of study to acquire; since i knew not of any book, or other guide, that would spread out before me the generalities and processes of the sciences, and i apprehended that i should have no choice but to extract them for myself, as i best could, from the details. happily for me, dr. whewell, early in this year, published his history of the inductive sciences. i read it with eagerness, and found in it a considerable approximation to what i wanted. much, if not most, of the philosophy of the work appeared open to objection; but the materials were there, for my own thoughts to work upon: and the author had given to those materials that first degree of elaboration, which so greatly facilitates and abridges the subsequent labour. i had now obtained what i had been waiting for. under the impulse given me by the thoughts excited by dr. whewell, i read again sir j. herschel's discourse on the study of natural philosophy: and i was able to measure the progress my mind had made, by the great help i now found in this work though i had read and even reviewed it several years before with little profit. i now set myself vigorously to work out the subject in thought and in writing. the time i bestowed on this had to be stolen from occupations more urgent. i had just two months to spare, at this period, in the intervals of writing for the review. in these two months i completed the first draft of about a third, the most difficult third, of the book. what i had before written, i estimate at another third, so that one-third remained. what i wrote at this time consisted of the remainder of the doctrine of reasoning (the theory of trains of reasoning, and demonstrative science), and the greater part of the book on induction. when this was done, i had, as it seemed to me, untied all the really hard knots, and the completion of the book had become only a question of time. having got thus far, i had to leave off in order to write two articles for the next number of the review. when these were written, i returned to the subject, and now for the first time fell in with comte's cours de philosophie positive, or rather with the two volumes of it which were all that had at that time been published. my theory of induction was substantially completed before i knew of comte's book; and it is perhaps well that i came to it by a different road from his, since the consequence has been that my treatise contains, what his certainly does not, a reduction of the inductive process to strict rules and to a scientific test, such as the syllogism is for ratiocination. comte is always precise and profound on the method of investigation, but he does not even attempt any exact definition of the conditions of proof: and his writings show that he never attained a just conception of them. this, however, was specifically the problem, which, in treating of induction, i had proposed to myself. nevertheless, i gained much from comte, with which to enrich my chapters in the subsequent rewriting: and his book was of essential service to me in some of the parts which still remained to be thought out. as his subsequent volumes successively made their appearance, i read them with avidity, but, when he reached the subject of social science, with varying feelings. the fourth volume disappointed me: it contained those of his opinions on social subjects with which i most disagree. but the fifth, containing the connected view of history, rekindled all my enthusiasm; which the sixth (or concluding) volume did not materially abate. in a merely logical point of view, the only leading conception for which i am indebted to him is that of the inverse deductive method, as the one chiefly applicable to the complicated subjects of history and statistics: a process differing from the more common form of the deductive method in this that instead of arriving at its conclusions by general reasoning, and verifying them by specific experience (as is the natural order in the deductive branches of physical science), it obtains its generalizations by a collation of specific experience, and verifies them by ascertaining whether they are such as would follow from known general principles. this was an idea entirely new to me when i found it in comte: and but for him i might not soon (if ever) have arrived at it.
in the same year, 1837, and in the midst of these occupations, i resumed the system of logic. i had not touched my pen on the subject for five years, having been brought to a halt on the threshold of induction. i had gradually discovered that what was mainly needed to overcome the difficulties of that branch of the subject was a comprehensive and also accurate view of the whole circle of physical science, which i feared it would take me a long course of study to acquire; because i did not know of any book or other guide that would spread out before me the generalities and processes of the sciences, and i thought i would have to extract them for myself, as i best could, from the details. happily for me, dr whewell, early in this year, published his history of the inductive sciences. i read it with eagerness, and found in it a considerable approximation to what i wanted. much if not most of the philosophy of the work appeared open to objection; but the materials were there for my own thoughts to work on, and the author had given them that first degree of elaboration that so greatly facilitates and abridges the subsequent labour. i had now obtained what i had been waiting for. under the impulse given me by the thoughts excited by dr whewell, i read again sir j. herschel's discourse on the study of natural philosophy, and i could measure the progress my mind had made by the great help i now found in this work though i had read and even reviewed it several years earlier, with little profit. i now set myself vigorously to work out the subject in thought and in writing. the time i spent on this had to be stolen from more urgent occupations. i had just two months to spare at this period, in the intervals of writing for the review. in these two months i completed the first draft of about a third, the most difficult third, of the book. i had already written about another third, so that only one-third remained. what i wrote at this time consisted of the remainder of the doctrine of reasoning (the theory of trains of reasoning, and demonstrative science), and most of book iv on induction. when this was done, it seemed to me that i had untied all the really hard knots, and the completion of the book had become only a question of time. having got that far i had to leave off in order to write two articles for the next number of the review. evaluating comte when these were written i returned to the subject of induction, and now for the first time i came across the two volumes of comte's cours de philosophie positive that had so far been published. my theory of induction was substantially completed before i knew of comte's book; and it is perhaps well that i came to it by a different road from his, since the consequence has been that my treatise contains as his certainly does not a reduction of the inductive process to strict rules and to a scientific test, in the way that the syllogism is a test for ratiocination. comte is always precise and profound on the methods of investigation, but he does not even attempt any exact definition of the conditions of proof; and his writings show that he never achieved a sound conception of them. but this was precisely the problem i had proposed to myself in writing about induction. nevertheless, i gained much from comte with which to enrich my chapters in the rewriting, and his book was of essential service to me in some parts that remained to be thought out. as his subsequent volumes successively appeared i read them avidly, but when he reached the subject of social science i read with varying feelings. the fourth volume disappointed me: it contained those of his opinions on social subjects that i most disagree with. but the fifth, containing the connected view of history, rekindled all my enthusiasm, which the sixth (or concluding) volume did not materially lessen. the only purely logical leading conception for which i am indebted to him is that of the inverse deductive method, as the method chiefly applicable to the complicated subjects of history and statistics, a process differing from the more common form of the deductive method in that instead of arriving at its conclusions by general reasoning, and verifying them by specific experience (as is the natural order in the deductive branches of physical science), it obtains its generalisations by a collation of specific experiences, and verifies them by ascertaining whether they are such as would follow from known general principles. this was an entirely new idea to me when i found it in comte, and but for him i might not soon (if ever) have arrived at it.

i had been long an ardent admirer of comte's writings before i had any communication with himself; nor did i ever, to the last, see him in the body. but for some years we were frequent correspondents, until our correspondence became controversial, and our zeal cooled. i was the first to slacken correspondence; he was the first to drop it. i found, and he probably found likewise, that i could do no good to his mind, and that all the good he could do to mine, he did by his books. this would never have led to discontinuance of intercourse, if the differences between us had been on matters of simple doctrine. but they were chiefly on those points of opinion which blended in both of us with our strongest feelings, and determined the entire direction of our aspirations. i had fully agreed with him when he maintained that the mass of mankind, including even their rulers in all the practical departments of life, must, from the necessity of the case, accept most of their opinions on political and social matters, as they do on physical, from the authority of those who have bestowed more study on those subjects than they generally have it in their power to do. this lesson had been strongly impressed on me by the early work of comte, to which i have adverted. and there was nothing in his great treatise which i admired more than his remarkable exposition of the benefits which the nations of modern europe have historically derived from the separation, during the middle ages, of temporal and spiritual power, and the distinct organization of the latter. i agreed with him that the moral and intellectual ascendancy, once exercised by priests, must in time pass into the hands of philosophers, and will naturally do so when they become sufficiently unanimous, and in other respects worthy to possess it. but when he exaggerated this line of thought into a practical system, in which philosophers were to be organized into a kind of corporate hierarchy, invested with almost the same spiritual supremacy (though without any secular power) once possessed by the catholic church; when i found him relying on this spiritual authority as the only security for good government, the sole bulwark against practical oppression, and expecting that by it a system of despotism in the state and despotism in the family would be rendered innocuous and beneficial; it is not surprising, that while as logicians we were nearly at one, as sociologists we could travel together no further. m. comte lived to carry out these doctrines to their extremest consequences, by planning, in his last work, the systeme de politique positive, the completest system of spiritual and temporal despotism which ever yet emanated from a human brain, unless possibly that of ignatius loyola: a system by which the yoke of general opinion, wielded by an organized body of spiritual teachers and rulers, would be made supreme over every action, and as far as is in human possibility, every thought, of every member of the community, as well in the things which regard only himself, as in those which concern the interests of others. it is but just to say that this work is a considerable improvement, in many points of feeling, over comte's previous writings on the same subjects: but as an accession to social philosophy, the only value it seems to me to possess, consists in putting an end to the notion that no effectual moral authority can be maintained over society without the aid of religious belief; for comte's work recognises no religion except that of humanity, yet it leaves an irresistible conviction that any moral beliefs concurred in by the community generally may be brought to bear upon the whole conduct and lives of its individual members, with an energy and potency truly alarming to think of. the book stands a monumental warning to thinkers on society and politics, of what happens when once men lose sight, in their speculations, of the value of liberty and of individuality.
i had been long an ardent admirer of comte's writings before i had any communication with comte himself, and i never did meet him in the flesh. but for some years we were frequent correspondents, until our correspondence became full of controversy and our zeal cooled. i was the first to slacken correspondence; he was the first to drop it. i found and so did he, probably that i could do no good to his mind, and that all the good he could do to mine he did by his books. this would never have led to breaking off contact if the differences between us had been on matters of simple doctrine. but they were chiefly on points of opinion that blended in both of us with our strongest feelings, and determined the entire direction of our aspirations. i had fully agreed with him when he maintained that the mass of mankind, including even their rulers in all the practical departments of life, must from the necessity of the case accept most of their opinions on political and social matters, as they do on physical, from the authority of those who have bestowed more study on those subjects than they generally have it in their power to do. this lesson had been strongly impressed on me by the early work of comte that i have mentioned. and there was nothing in his great treatise that i admired more than his remarkable exposition of the benefits the nations of modern europe have historically derived from the separation during the middle ages of temporal from spiritual power, and the distinct organisation of the latter. i agreed with him that the moral and intellectual ascendancy once exercised by priests must in time pass into the hands of philosophers, and will naturally do so when they become sufficiently unanimous, and in other respects worthy to possess it. but when he exaggerated this line of thought into a practical system in which philosophers were to be organised into a kind of corporate hierarchy, invested with almost the same spiritual supremacy as the catholic church once had (though without any secular power); when i found him relying on this spiritual authority as the only security for good government, the sole bulwark against practical oppression, and expecting that it would make innocuous and beneficial a system of despotism in the state and despotism in the family; it is not surprising that while as logicians we were nearly at one, as sociologists we could travel together no further. m. comte lived to carry these doctrines to their most extreme consequences in his last work, the systeme de politique positive, where he laid out the most complete system of spiritual and temporal despotism that ever yet emanated from any human brain with the possible exception of ignatius loyola's a system by which the yoke of general opinion, wielded by an organised body of spiritual teachers and rulers, would be made supreme over every action and (as far as humanly possible) every thought of every member of the community, not only in matters involving the interests of others but also in ones that involve only the concerns of the person himself. it is only fair to say that this work is a considerable improvement, in many points of feeling, over comte's previous writings on the same subjects; but as a contribution to social philosophy its only value (it seems to me) consists in putting an end to the notion that no effectual moral authority can be maintained over society without the aid of religious belief; for comte's work recognises no religion except that of humanity, yet it leaves an irresistible conviction that any moral beliefs agreed to by the community generally can be brought to bear on the whole conduct and lives of its individual members with an energy and potency truly alarming to think of. the book stands a monumental warning to thinkers about society and politics of what happens when men lose sight in their theorising of the value of liberty and of individuality.

to return to myself. the review engrossed, for some time longer, nearly all the time i could devote to authorship, or to thinking with authorship in view. the articles from the london and westminster review which are reprinted in the dissertations, are scarcely a fourth part of those i wrote. in the conduct of the review i had two principal objects. one was to free philosophic radicalism from the reproach of sectarian benthamism. i desired, while retaining the precision of expression, the definiteness of meaning, the contempt of declamatory phrases and vague generalities, which were so honourably characteristic both of bentham and of my father, to give a wider basis and a more free and genial character to radical speculations; to show that there was a radical philosophy, better and more complete than bentham's, while recognizing and incorporating all of bentham's which is permanently valuable. in this first object i, to a certain extent, succeeded. the other thing i attempted, was to stir up the educated radicals, in and out of parliament, to exertion, and induce them to make themselves, what i thought by using the proper means they might become a powerful party capable of taking the government of the country, or at least of dictating the terms on which they should share it with the whigs. this attempt was from the first chimerical: partly because the time was unpropitious, the reform fervour being in its period of ebb, and the tory influences powerfully rallying; but still more, because, as austin so truly said, the country did not contain the men. among the radicals in parliament there were several qualified to be useful members of an enlightened radical party, but none capable of forming and leading such a party. the exhortations i addressed to them found no response. one occasion did present itself when there seemed to be room for a bold and successful stroke for radicalism. lord durham had left the ministry, by reason, as was thought, of their not being sufficiently liberal; he afterwards accepted from them the task of ascertaining and removing the causes of the canadian rebellion; he had shown a disposition to surround himself at the outset with radical advisers; one of his earliest measures, a good measure both in intention and in effect, having been disapproved and reversed by the government at home, he had resigned his post, and placed himself openly in a position of quarrel with the ministers. here was a possible chief for a radical party in the person of a man of importance, who was hated by the tories and had just been injured by the whigs. any one who had the most elementary notions of party tactics, must have attempted to make something of such an opportunity. lord durham was bitterly attacked from all sides, inveighed against by enemies, given up by timid friends; while those who would willingly have defended him did not know what to say. he appeared to be returning a defeated and discredited man. i had followed the canadian events from the beginning; i had been one of the prompters of his prompters; his policy was almost exactly what mine would have been, and i was in a position to defend it. i wrote and published a manifesto in the review, in which i took the very highest ground in his behalf, claiming for him not mere acquittal, but praise and honour. instantly a number of other writers took up the tone: i believe there was a portion of truth in what lord durham, soon after, with polite exaggeration, said to me that to this article might be ascribed the almost triumphal reception which he met with on his arrival in england. i believe it to have been the word in season, which, at a critical moment, does much to decide the result; the touch which determines whether a stone, set in motion at the top of an eminence, shall roll down on one side or on the other. all hopes connected with lord durham as a politician soon vanished; but with regard to canadian, and generally to colonial policy, the cause was gained: lord durham's report, written by charles buller, partly under the inspiration of wakefield, began a new era; its recommendations, extending to complete internal self-government, were in full operation in canada within two or three years, and have been since extended to nearly all the other colonies, of european race, which have any claim to the character of important communities. and i may say that in successfully upholding the reputation of lord durham and his advisers at the most important moment, i contributed materially to this result.
to return to myself. for some time longer the review took up nearly all the time i could devote to authorship or to thinking with authorship in view. the articles from the london and westminster review that are reprinted in the dissertations are hardly a quarter of those i wrote. in the conduct of the review i had two principal objects. (1) one was to free philosophic radicalism from the reproach of sectarian benthamism. i wanted while retaining the precision of expression, the definiteness of meaning, the contempt for declamatory phrases and vague generalities, that were so honourably characteristic of bentham and of my father to give a wider basis and a more free and genial character to radical theorising; to show that there was a better and more complete radical philosophy than bentham's, while recognising and incorporating all of bentham's that is permanently valuable. in this first objective i succeeded to a certain extent. (2) the other thing i attempted was to stir up the educated radicals, in and out of parliament, to exertion, to induce them to turn themselves into a powerful party capable of taking the government of the country, or at least of dictating the terms on which they would share it with the whigs, this being something i thought they could become by using the proper means. this attempt was chimerical from the outset; partly because the time was unpropitious, the reform fervour being in its period of ebb and the tory influences powerfully rallying; but still more because as austin so truly said the country did not contain the men. among the radicals in parliament there were several qualified to be useful members of an enlightened radical party, but none capable of forming and leading such a party. the exhortations i addressed to them found no response.

one other case occurred during my conduct of the review, which similarly illustrated the effect of taking a prompt initiative. i believe that the early success and reputation of carlyle's french revolution, were considerably accelerated by what i wrote about it in the review. immediately on its publication, and before the commonplace critics, all whose rules and modes of judgment it set at defiance, had time to pre-occupy the public with their disapproval of it, i wrote and published a review of the book, hailing it as one of those productions of genius which are above all rules, and are a law to themselves. neither in this case nor in that of lord durham do i ascribe the impression, which i think was produced by what i wrote, to any particular merit of execution: indeed, in at least one of the cases (the article on carlyle) i do not think the execution was good. and in both instances, i am persuaded that anybody, in a position to be read, who had expressed the same opinion at the same precise time, and had made any tolerable statement of the just grounds for it, would have produced the same effect. but, after the complete failure of my hopes of putting a new life into radical politics by means of the review, i am glad to look back on these two instances of success in an honest attempt to do mediate service to things and persons that deserved it. after the last hope of the formation of a radical party had disappeared, it was time for me to stop the heavy expenditure of time and money which the review cost me. it had to some extent answered my personal purpose as a vehicle for my opinions. it had enabled me to express in print much of my altered mode of thought, and to separate myself in a marked manner from the narrower benthamism of my early writings. this was done by the general tone of all i wrote, including various purely literary articles, but especially by the two papers (reprinted in the dissertations) which attempted a philosophical estimate of bentham and of coleridge. in the first of these, while doing full justice to the merits of bentham, i pointed out what i thought the errors and deficiencies of his philosophy. the substance of this criticism i still think perfectly just; but i have sometimes doubted whether it was right to publish it at that time. i have often felt that bentham's philosophy, as an instrument of progress, has been to some extent discredited before it had done its work, and that to lend a hand towards lowering its reputation was doing more harm than service to improvement. now, however, when a counter-reaction appears to be setting in towards what is good in benthamism, i can look with more satisfaction on this criticism of its defects, especially as i have myself balanced it by vindications of the fundamental principles of bentham's philosophy, which are reprinted along with it in the same collection. in the essay on coleridge i attempted to characterize the european reaction against the negative philosophy of the eighteenth century: and here, if the effect only of this one paper were to be considered, i might be thought to have erred by giving undue prominence to the favourable side, as i had done in the case of bentham to the unfavourable. in both cases, the impetus with which i had detached myself from what was untenable in the doctrines of bentham and of the eighteenth century, may have carried me, though in appearance rather than in reality, too far on the contrary side. but as far as relates to the article on coleridge, my defence is, that i was writing for radicals and liberals, and it was my business to dwell most on that, in writers of a different school, from the knowledge of which they might derive most improvement.
one other case occurred during my conduct of the review, which similarly illustrated the effect of taking a prompt initiative. i believe that the early success and reputation of carlyle's french revolution were considerably accelerated by what i wrote about it in the review. immediately on its publication and before the commonplace critics all those whose rules and modes of judgment it set at defiance had time to preoccupy the public with their disapproval of it, i wrote and published a review of the book, hailing it as one of those productions of genius that are above all rules and are a law to themselves. neither in this case nor in that of lord durham do i ascribe the impression that i think was produced by what i wrote to any particular merit in the writing; indeed i do not think that the article on carlyle was well written. in both cases i am convinced that anybody in a position to be read, who expressed the same opinion at the same precise time and made a tolerable statement of the just grounds for it, would have produced the same effects. but, after the complete failure of my hopes of putting a new life into radical politics by means of the review, i am glad to look back on these two instances of success in an honest attempt to do mediate service to things and persons that deserved it.

chapter vii.
writing on bentham and coleridge

general view of the remainder of my life.
notes part 7: general view of the remainder of my life

from this time, what is worth relating of my life will come into a very small compass; for i have no further mental changes to tell of, but only, as i hope, a continued mental progress; which does not admit of a consecutive history, and the results of which, if real, will be best found in my writings. i shall, therefore, greatly abridge the chronicle of my subsequent years.
what is worth relating of my life from this time onward will come into a very small compass; for i have no further mental changes to tell of but only (i hope) continued mental progress. this does not admit of a consecutive history, and the results of it if they are real will be best found in my writings. so i shall greatly abridge the chronicle of my subsequent years.

the first use i made of the leisure which i gained by disconnecting myself from the review, was to finish the logic. in july and august, 1838, i had found an interval in which to execute what was still undone of the original draft of the third book. in working out the logical theory of those laws of nature which are not laws of causation, nor corollaries from such laws, i was led to recognize kinds as realities in nature, and not mere distinctions for convenience; a light which i had not obtained when the first book was written, and which made it necessary for me to modify and enlarge several chapters of that book. the book on language and classification, and the chapter on the classification of fallacies, were drafted in the autumn of the same year; the remainder of the work, in the summer and autumn of 1840. from april following to the end of 1841, my spare time was devoted to a complete rewriting of the book from its commencement. it is in this way that all my books have been composed. they were always written at least twice over; a first draft of the entire work was completed to the very end of the subject, then the whole begun again de novo; but incorporating, in the second writing, all sentences and parts of sentences of the old draft, which appeared as suitable to my purpose as anything which i could write in lieu of them. i have found great advantages in this system of double redaction. it combines, better than any other mode of composition, the freshness and vigour of the first conception, with the superior precision and completeness resulting from prolonged thought. in my own case, moreover, i have found that the patience necessary for a careful elaboration of the details of composition and expression, costs much less effort after the entire subject has been once gone through, and the substance of all that i find to say has in some manner, however imperfect, been got upon paper. the only thing which i am careful, in the first draft, to make as perfect as i am able, is the arrangement. if that is bad, the whole thread on which the ideas string themselves becomes twisted; thoughts placed in a wrong connection are not expounded in a manner that suits the right, and a first draft with this original vice is next to useless as a foundation for the final treatment.
the first use i made of the leisure gained by disconnecting myself from the westminster review was to finish the logic. in july and august 1838 i had found an interval in which to complete the first draft of book iii. in working out the logical theory of the laws of nature that are not laws of causation or corollaries from such laws, i was led to recognise kinds as realities in nature and not mere distinctions for convenience; a light that i had not obtained when book i was written and that required me to modify and enlarge several chapters of that book. the book on language and classification and the chapter on the classification of fallacies were drafted in the autumn of the same year, and the remainder of the work in the summer and autumn of 1840. from april following to the end of 1841 my spare time was devoted to completely rewriting the entire book. this is how all my books have been composed. they were always written at least twice over: a first draft of the entire work was completed to the very end of the subject, then the whole begun again from the start, but now incorporating all sentences and phrases of the old draft that seemed as suitable to my purpose as anything i could write in place of them. i have found great advantages in this system of double redaction. better than any other mode of composition it combines the freshness and vigour of the first conception with the superior precision and completeness resulting from prolonged thought. in my own case, moreover, i have found that the patience needed for a careful elaboration of the details of composition and expression costs much less effort after the entire subject has been once gone through and the substance of what i have to say has in some manner, however imperfect, been put on paper. the only thing i am careful to make as perfect as i can in the first draft is the arrangement. if that is bad, the whole thread on which the ideas string themselves becomes twisted; thoughts placed in a wrong connection are not expounded in a manner that suits the right one, and a first draft with this vice is next to useless as a foundation for the final treatment.

during the re-writing of the logic, dr. whewell's philosophy of the inductive sciences made its appearance; a circumstance fortunate for me, as it gave me what i greatly desired, a full treatment of the subject by an antagonist, and enabled me to present my ideas with greater clearness and emphasis as well as fuller and more varied development, in defending them against definite objections, or confronting them distinctly with an opposite theory. the controversies with dr. whewell, as well as much matter derived from comte, were first introduced into the book in the course of the re-writing.
during the re-writing of the logic dr whewell's philosophy of the inductive sciences made its appearance. this was fortunate for me, as it gave me a full treatment of the subject by an antagonist, and enabled me to present my ideas with greater clearness and emphasis as well as fuller and more varied development, in defending them against definite objections or clearly confronting them with an opposite theory. the controversies with dr whewell, as well as much matter derived from comte, were first introduced into the book in the course of the re-writing.

at the end of 1841, the book being ready for the press, i offered it to murray, who kept it until too late for publication that season, and then refused it, for reasons which could just as well have been given at first. but i have had no cause to regret a rejection which led to my offering it to mr. parker, by whom it was published in the spring of 1843. my original expectations of success were extremely limited. archbishop whately had, indeed, rehabilitated the name of logic, and the study of the forms, rules, and fallacies of ratiocination; and dr. whewell's writings had begun to excite an interest in the other part of my subject, the theory of induction. a treatise, however, on a matter so abstract, could not be expected to be popular; it could only be a book for students, and students on such subjects were not only (at least in england) few, but addicted chiefly to the opposite school of metaphysics, the ontological and innate principles school. i therefore did not expect that the book would have many readers, or approvers; and looked for little practical effect from it, save that of keeping the tradition unbroken of what i thought a better philosophy. what hopes i had of exciting any immediate attention, were mainly grounded on the polemical propensities of dr whewell; who, i thought, from observation of his conduct in other cases, would probably do something to bring the book into notice, by replying, and that promptly, to the attack on his opinions. he did reply but not till 1850, just in time for me to answer him in the third edition. how the book came to have, for a work of the kind, so much success, and what sort of persons compose the bulk of those who have bought, i will not venture to say read, it, i have never thoroughly understood. but taken in conjunction with the many proofs which have since been given of a revival of speculation, speculation too of a free kind, in many quarters, and above all (where at one time i should have least expected it) in the universities, the fact becomes partially intelligible. i have never indulged the illusion that the book had made any considerable impression on philosophical opinion. the german, or a priori view of human knowledge, and of the knowing faculties, is likely for some time longer (though it may be hoped in a diminishing degree) to predominate among those who occupy themselves with such inquiries, both here and on the continent. but the system of logic supplies what was much wanted, a text-book of the opposite doctrine that which derives all knowledge from experience, and all moral and intellectual qualities principally from the direction given to the associations. i make as humble an estimate as anybody of what either an analysis of logical processes, or any possible canons of evidence, can do by themselves towards guiding or rectifying the operations of the understanding. combined with other requisites, i certainly do think them of great use; but whatever may be the practical value of a true philosophy of these matters, it is hardly possible to exaggerate the mischiefs of a false one. the notion that truths external to the mind may be known by intuition or consciousness, independently of observation and experience, is, i am persuaded, in these times, the great intellectual support of false doctrines and bad institutions. by the aid of this theory, every inveterate belief and every intense feeling, of which the origin is not remembered, is enabled to dispense with the obligation of justifying itself by reason, and is erected into its own all-sufficient voucher and justification. there never was such an instrument devised for consecrating all deep-seated prejudices. and the chief strength of this false philosophy in morals, politics, and religion, lies in the appeal which it is accustomed to make to the evidence of mathematics and of the cognate branches of physical science. to expel it from these, is to drive it from its stronghold: and because this had never been effectually done, the intuitive school, even after what my father had written in his analysis of the mind, had in appearance, and as far as published writings were concerned, on the whole the best of the argument. in attempting to clear up the real nature of the evidence of mathematical and physical truths, the system of logic met the intuitive philosophers on ground on which they had previously been deemed unassailable; and gave its own explanation, from experience and association, of that peculiar character of what are called necessary truths, which is adduced as proof that their evidence must come from a deeper source than experience. whether this has been done effectually, is still sub judice; and even then, to deprive a mode of thought so strongly rooted in human prejudices and partialities, of its mere speculative support, goes but a very little way towards overcoming it; but though only a step, it is a quite indispensable one; for since, after all, prejudice can only be successfully combated by philosophy, no way can really be made against it permanently until it has been shown not to have philosophy on its side.
at the end of 1841 the book was ready for the press and i offered it to murray, who kept it until too late for publication that season, and then refused it for reasons that could just as well have been given at first. but i have had no cause to regret a rejection which led to my offering it to mr parker, by whom it was published in the spring of 1843. my original expectations of success were extremely limited. archbishop whately had indeed rehabilitated the name of logic and the study of the forms, rules, and fallacies of reasoning; and dr whewell's writings had begun to arouse an interest in the other part of my subject, the theory of induction. but a treatise on such an abstract matter could not be expected to be popular; it could only be a book for students, and students on such subjects were (at least in england) few and devoted chiefly to the opposite school of metaphysics, the ontological and innate principles school. so i did not expect the book to have many readers or approvers; and i expected little practical effect from it except for keeping unbroken the tradition of what i thought a better philosophy. what hopes i had of arousing any immediate attention were mainly based on dr whewell's polemical propensities; from observation of his conduct in other cases i thought he would probably do something to bring the book into notice by replying, promptly, to its attack on his opinions. he did reply but not till 1850, just in time for me to answer him in the third edition. i have never thoroughly understood how the book came to have so much success surprisingly much for a work of that kind or what sort of persons compose the bulk of those who have bought (i will not venture to say read) it. but the fact becomes partially intelligible in the light of the many proofs that have since been given of a revival of theorising, and indeed theorising of a free kind, in many quarters and especially in the universities, where at one time i would have least expected it.

being now released from any active concern in temporary politics, and from any literary occupation involving personal communication with contributors and others, i was enabled to indulge the inclination, natural to thinking persons when the age of boyish vanity is once past, for limiting my own society to a very few persons. general society, as now carried on in england, is so insipid an affair, even to the persons who make it what it is, that it is kept up for any reason rather than the pleasure it affords. all serious discussion on matters on which opinions differ, being considered ill-bred, and the national deficiency in liveliness and sociability having prevented the cultivation of the art of talking agreeably on trifles, in which the french of the last century so much excelled, the sole attraction of what is called society to those who are not at the top of the tree, is the hope of being aided to climb a little higher in it; while to those who are already at the top, it is chiefly a compliance with custom, and with the supposed requirements of their station. to a person of any but a very common order in thought or feeling, such society, unless he has personal objects to serve by it, must be supremely unattractive: and most people, in the present day, of any really high class of intellect, make their contact with it so slight, and at such long intervals, as to be almost considered as retiring from it altogether. those persons of any mental superiority who do otherwise, are, almost without exception, greatly deteriorated by it. not to mention loss of time, the tone of their feelings is lowered: they become less in earnest about those of their opinions respecting which they must remain silent in the society they frequent: they come to look upon their most elevated objects as unpractical, or, at least, too remote from realization to be more than a vision, or a theory, and if, more fortunate than most, they retain their higher principles unimpaired, yet with respect to the persons and affairs of their own day they insensibly adopt the modes of feeling and judgment in which they can hope for sympathy from the company they keep. a person of high intellect should never go into unintellectual society unless he can enter it as an apostle; yet he is the only person with high objects who can safely enter it at all. persons even of intellectual aspirations had much better, if they can, make their habitual associates of at least their equals, and, as far as possible, their superiors, in knowledge, intellect, and elevation of sentiment. moreover, if the character is formed, and the mind made up, on the few cardinal points of human opinion, agreement of conviction and feeling on these, has been felt in all times to be an essential requisite of anything worthy the name of friendship, in a really earnest mind. all these circumstances united, made the number very small of those whose society, and still more whose intimacy, i now voluntarily sought.
the dangers of general society being now released from any active concern in contemporary politics, and from any literary occupation involving personal communication with contributors and others, i could now indulge the inclination natural to thinking persons when the age of boyish vanity is once past for limiting my society to a very few persons. general society as now carried on in england is such an insipid affair, and found to be so even by the persons who make it what it is, that it is kept up for any reason rather than the pleasure it affords! all serious discussion on matters on which opinions differ being considered ill-bred, and the national deficiency in liveliness and sociability having prevented the cultivation of the art of talking agreeably on trifles, in which the french of the last century so much excelled, the sole attraction of so-called society to those who are not at the top of the tree is the hope of being aided to climb a little higher in it; while to those who are already at the top it is chiefly a compliance with custom and with the supposed requirements of their station. such society must be supremely unattractive to anyone with more than a very common order in thought or feeling, unless he has personal objectives to serve by it; and these days most people with high-class intellects make their contact with it so slight, and at such long intervals, as to be almost considered as retiring from it altogether. those persons of any mental superiority who do otherwise are almost without exception greatly harmed by it. not to mention loss of time, the tone of their feelings is lowered: they become less in earnest about opinions of theirs that they must remain silent about in the society they frequent; they come to look on their most elevated objectives as unpractical, or at least as too remote from realisation to be more than a vision or a theory. and if they have the unusual good fortune to retain their higher principles unimpaired, still with respect to the persons and affairs of their own day they unconsciously adopt the modes of feeling and judgment in which they can hope for sympathy from the company they keep. a person of high intellect should never go into unintellectual society unless he can enter it as an apostle; yet he is the only person with high aims who can safely enter it at all. persons merely with intellectual aspirations had much better associate regularly with at least their equals and as far as possible their superiors in knowledge, intellect, and elevation of sentiment. moreover, if the character is formed and the mind made up on the few cardinal points of human opinion, agreement of conviction and feeling on these has always been felt to be essential for anything worthy the name of friendship in a really earnest mind. these factors combined to make very small the number of those whose society, and still more whose intimacy, i now voluntarily sought.

among these, by far the principal was the incomparable friend of whom i have already spoken. at this period she lived mostly with one young daughter, in a quiet part of the country, and only occasionally in town, with her first husband, mr. taylor. i visited her equally in both places; and was greatly indebted to the strength of character which enabled her to disregard the false interpretations liable to be put on the frequency of my visits to her while living generally apart from mr. taylor, and on our occasionally travelling together, though in all other respects our conduct during those years gave not the slightest ground for any other supposition than the true one, that our relation to each other at that time was one of strong affection and confidential intimacy only. for though we did not consider the ordinances of society binding on a subject so entirely personal, we did feel bound that our conduct should be such as in no degree to bring discredit on her husband, nor therefore on herself.
rethinking politics with mrs taylor by far the principal one of these was the incomparable friend of whom i have already spoken. at this period she lived mostly with one young daughter in a quiet part of the country, and was only occasionally in town with her first husband mr taylor. i visited her equally in both places; and was greatly indebted to the strength of character that enabled her to disregard the false interpretations liable to be put on the frequency of my visits to her while she was living generally apart from mr taylor, and on our occasionally travelling together, though in all other respects our conduct during those years gave not the slightest ground for any supposition other than the true one, that our relation to each other at that time was one of strong affection and confidential intimacy only. for though we did not consider the ordinances of society binding on such an entirely personal subject, we did feel bound that our conduct should not in any way bring discredit on her husband or therefore on herself.

in this third period (as it may be termed) of my mental progress, which now went hand in hand with hers, my opinions gained equally in breadth and depth, i understood more things, and those which i had understood before i now understood more thoroughly. i had now completely turned back from what there had been of excess in my reaction against benthamism. i had, at the height of that reaction, certainly become much more indulgent to the common opinions of society and the world, and more willing to be content with seconding the superficial improvement which had begun to take place in those common opinions, than became one whose convictions on so many points, differed fundamentally from them. i was much more inclined, than i can now approve, to put in abeyance the more decidedly heretical part of my opinions, which i now look upon as almost the only ones, the assertion of which tends in any way to regenerate society. but in addition to this, our opinions were far more heretical than mine had been in the days of my most extreme benthamism. in those days i had seen little further than the old school of political economists into the possibilities of fundamental improvement in social arrangements. private property, as now understood, and inheritance, appeared to me, as to them, the dernier mot of legislation: and i looked no further than to mitigating the inequalities consequent on these institutions, by getting rid of primogeniture and entails. the notion that it was possible to go further than this in removing the injustice for injustice it is, whether admitting of a complete remedy or not involved in the fact that some are born to riches and the vast majority to poverty, i then reckoned chimerical, and only hoped that by universal education, leading to voluntary restraint on population, the portion of the poor might be made more tolerable. in short, i was a democrat, but not the least of a socialist. we were now much less democrats than i had been, because so long as education continues to be so wretchedly imperfect, we dreaded the ignorance and especially the selfishness and brutality of the mass: but our ideal of ultimate improvement went far beyond democracy, and would class us decidedly under the general designation of socialists. while we repudiated with the greatest energy that tyranny of society over the individual which most socialistic systems are supposed to involve, we yet looked forward to a time when society will no longer be divided into the idle and the industrious; when the rule that they who do not work shall not eat, will be applied not to paupers only, but impartially to all; when the division of the produce of labour, instead of depending, as in so great a degree it now does, on the accident of birth, will be made by concert on an acknowledged principle of justice; and when it will no longer either be, or be thought to be, impossible for human beings to exert themselves strenuously in procuring benefits which are not to be exclusively their own, but to be shared with the society they belong to. the social problem of the future we considered to be, how to unite the greatest individual liberty of action, with a common ownership in the raw material of the globe, and an equal participation of all in the benefits of combined labour. we had not the presumption to suppose that we could already foresee, by what precise form of institutions these objects could most effectually be attained, or at how near or how distant a period they would become practicable. we saw clearly that to render any such social transformation either possible or desirable, an equivalent change of character must take place both in the uncultivated herd who now compose the labouring masses, and in the immense majority of their employers. both these classes must learn by practice to labour and combine for generous, or at all events for public and social purposes, and not, as hitherto, solely for narrowly interested ones. but the capacity to do this has always existed in mankind, and is not, nor is ever likely to be, extinct. education, habit, and the cultivation of the sentiments, will make a common man dig or weave for his country, as readily as fight for his country. true enough, it is only by slow degrees, and a system of culture prolonged through successive generations, that men in general can be brought up to this point. but the hindrance is not in the essential constitution of human nature. interest in the common good is at present so weak a motive in the generality not because it can never be otherwise, but because the mind is not accustomed to dwell on it as it dwells from morning till night on things which tend only to personal advantage. when called into activity, as only self-interest now is, by the daily course of life, and spurred from behind by the love of distinction and the fear of shame, it is capable of producing, even in common men, the most strenuous exertions as well as the most heroic sacrifices. the deep-rooted selfishness which forms the general character of the existing state of society, is so
in this third period (as it may be termed) of my mental progress, which now went hand in hand with hers, my opinions gained equally in breadth and depth: i understood more things, and i now understood more thoroughly things i had understood before. i had now completely turned back from what had been excessive in my reaction against benthamism. at the height of that reaction i had certainly become much more indulgent to the common opinions of society and the world, and more willing to be content with seconding the superficial improvement that had begun to take place in those common opinions, than was appropriate in someone whose convictions on so many points differed fundamentally from them. i was too inclined to put in abeyance the more decidedly heretical part of my opinions, which i now regard as almost the only ones the assertion of which tends in any way to regenerate society. but in addition to this our opinions i.e. mrs taylor's and mine were far more heretical than mine had been in the days of my most extreme benthamism. in those days i had seen little further than the old school of political economists into the possibilities of fundamental improvement in social arrangements. private property and inheritance had appeared to me, as to them, to be the last word in legislation; and i looked no further than to mitigating the inequalities produced by these institutions, by getting rid of primogeniture and entails. the notion that it was possible to go further than this in removing the injustice for it is an injustice, whether or not it can be completely remedied involved in the fact that some are born to riches and the vast majority to poverty, i then reckoned chimerical, and only hoped that by universal education leading to voluntary restraint on population the life of the poor might be made more tolerable. in short, i was a democrat but not in the least a socialist. we two were now much less democrats than i had been, because so long as education continues to be so wretchedly imperfect we dreaded the ignorance and especially the selfishness and brutality of the mass; but our ideal of ultimate improvement went far beyond democracy, and would class us decidedly under the general label socialists. while we repudiated with the greatest energy that tyranny of society over the individual which most socialistic systems are supposed to involve, we looked forward to a time when society will no longer be divided into the idle and the industrious, when the rule that they who do not work shall not eat will be applied not only to paupers but to everyone, when the division of the product of labour, instead of depending on the accident of birth, will be uncontroversially made on an acknowledged principle of justice; and when it will no longer be (or be thought to be) impossible for human beings to exert themselves strenuously in procuring benefits that are to be shared with the society they belong to.

in the principles of political economy, these opinions were promulgated, less clearly and fully in the first edition, rather more so in the second, and quite unequivocally in the third. the difference arose partly from the change of times, the first edition having been written and sent to press before the french revolution of 1848, after which the public mind became more open to the reception of novelties in opinion, and doctrines appeared moderate which would have been thought very startling a short time before. in the first edition the difficulties of socialism were stated so strongly, that the tone was on the whole that of opposition to it. in the year or two which followed, much time was given to the study of the best socialistic writers on the continent, and to meditation and discussion on the whole range of topics involved in the controversy: and the result was that most of what had been written on the subject in the first edition was cancelled, and replaced by arguments and reflections which represent a more advanced opinion.
the principles of political economy in the principles of political economy these opinions were promulgated, less clearly and fully in the first edition, rather more so in the second, and quite unequivocally in the third. the difference arose partly from the change of times, the first edition having been written and sent to press before the french revolution of 1848, after which the public mind became more open to the reception of novelties in opinion, and doctrines that would have been thought very startling a short time before now appeared moderate. in the first edition the difficulties of socialism were stated so strongly that the tone was on the whole that of opposition to it. in the following year or two much time was given to the study of the best socialistic writers on the continent, and to meditation and discussion on the whole range of topics involved in the controversy: and the result was that most of what had been written on the subject in the first edition was cancelled and replaced by arguments and reflections representing a more advanced opinion.

the political economy was far more rapidly executed than the logic, or indeed than anything of importance which i had previously written. it was commenced in the autumn of 1845, and was ready for the press before the end of 1847. in this period of little more than two years there was an interval of six months during which the work was laid aside, while i was writing articles in the morning chronicle (which unexpectedly entered warmly into my purpose) urging the formation of peasant properties on the waste lands of ireland. this was during the period of the famine, the winter of 1846-47, when the stern necessities of the time seemed to afford a chance of gaining attention for what appeared to me the only mode of combining relief to immediate destitution with permanent improvement of the social and economical condition of the irish people. but the idea was new and strange; there was no english precedent for such a proceeding: and the profound ignorance of english politicians and the english public concerning all social phenomena not generally met with in england (however common elsewhere), made my endeavours an entire failure. instead of a great operation on the waste lands, and the conversion of cottiers into proprietors, parliament passed a poor law for maintaining them as paupers: and if the nation has not since found itself in inextricable difficulties from the joint operation of the old evils and the quack remedy it is indebted for its deliverance to that most unexpected and surprising fact, the depopulation of ireland, commenced by famine, and continued by emigration.
the political economy was far more rapidly executed than the logic or indeed than anything of importance that i had previously written. it was started in the autumn of 1845 and was ready for the press before the end of 1847. in this period of little more than two years there was an interval of six months during which the work was laid aside while i was writing articles for the morning chronicle (which unexpectedly entered warmly into my purpose) urging the formation of peasant properties on the waste lands of ireland. this was during the period of the famine, the winter of 1846-47, when the stern necessities of the time seemed to provide a chance to gain attention for what appeared to me the only way of combining relief for immediate destitution with permanent improvement of the social and economic condition of the irish people. but the idea was new and strange; there was no english precedent for such a proceeding: and the profound ignorance of english politicians and the english public concerning all social phenomena not generally met with in england (however common elsewhere) made my endeavours an entire failure. instead of a great operation on the waste lands, and the conversion of tenants into proprietors, parliament passed a poor law for maintaining them as paupers; and if the nation has not since found itself in inextricable difficulties from the joint operation of the old evils and this quack remedy, it is indebted for its deliverance to the unexpected fact of the depopulation of ireland, started by famine and continued by emigration.

the rapid success of the political economy showed that the public wanted, and were prepared for such a book. published early in 1848, an edition of a thousand copies was sold in less than a year. another similar edition was published in the spring of 1849; and a third, of 1250 copies, early in 1852. it was, from the first, continually cited and referred to as an authority, because it was not a book merely of abstract science, but also of application, and treated political economy not as a thing by itself, but as a fragment of a greater whole; a branch of social philosophy, so interlinked with all the other branches, that its conclusions, even in its own peculiar province, are only true conditionally, subject to interference and counteraction from causes not directly within its scope: while to the character of a practical guide it has no pretension, apart from other classes of considerations. political economy, in truth, has never pretended to give advice to mankind with no lights but its own; though people who knew nothing but political economy (and therefore knew that ill) have taken upon themselves to advise, and could only do so by such lights as they had. but the numerous sentimental enemies of political economy, and its still more numerous interested enemies in sentimental guise, have been very successful in gaining belief for this among other unmerited imputations against it, and the principles having, in spite of the freedom of many of its opinions, become for the present the most popular treatise on the subject, has helped to disarm the enemies of so important a study. the amount of its worth as an exposition of the science, and the value of the different applications which it suggests, others of course must judge.
the rapid success of the political economy showed that the public wanted such a book and were prepared for it. published early in 1848, an edition of 1000 copies was sold in less than a year. another similar edition was published in the spring of 1849; and a third of 1250 copies was published early in 1852. it was from the first continually cited and referred to as an authority, because it was a book not merely of abstract science but also of application, and treated political economy not as a thing by itself but as a fragment of a greater whole; a branch of social philosophy so interlinked with all the other branches that its conclusions, even in its own particular province, are true only conditionally, subject to interference and counteraction from causes not directly within its scope; while it has no claim, when taken separately from other classes of considerations, to be a practical guide. political economy in fact has never claimed to give advice to mankind with no lights but its own; though people who knew nothing but political economy (and therefore didn't know that well) have taken it on themselves to advise, and could do so only by such lights as they had. but the numerous sentimental enemies of political economy, and its still more numerous interested enemies in sentimental guise, have been very successful in gaining belief for this i.e. for the accusation that political economy sets itself up as a practical guide among other unmerited imputations against it, and the principles having become for the present the most popular treatise on the subject, in spite of the freedom of many of its opinions, has helped to disarm the enemies of this important line of attack. it is not for me to judge how much it is worth as an exposition of the science, and what the value is of the applications it suggests.

for a considerable time after this, i published no work of magnitude; though i still occasionally wrote in periodicals, and my correspondence (much of it with persons quite unknown to me), on subjects of public interest, swelled to a considerable bulk. during these years i wrote or commenced various essays, for eventual publication, on some of the fundamental questions of human and social life, with regard to several of which i have already much exceeded the severity of the horatian precept. i continued to watch with keen interest the progress of public events. but it was not, on the whole, very encouraging to me. the european reaction after 1848, and the success of an unprincipled usurper in december, 1851, put an end, as it seemed, to all present hope for freedom or social improvement in france and the continent. in england, i had seen and continued to see many of the opinions of my youth obtain general recognition, and many of the reforms in institutions, for which i had through life contended, either effected or in course of being so. but these changes had been attended with much less benefit to human well-being than i should formerly have anticipated, because they had produced very little improvement in that which all real amelioration in the lot of mankind depends on, their intellectual and moral state: and it might even be questioned if the various causes of deterioration which had been at work in the meanwhile, had not more than counterbalanced the tendencies to improvement. i had learnt from experience that many false opinions may be exchanged for true ones, without in the least altering the habits of mind of which false opinions are the result. the english public, for example, are quite as raw and undiscerning on subjects of political economy since the nation has been converted to free-trade, as they were before; and are still further from having acquired better habits of thought and feeling, or being in any way better fortified against error, on subjects of a more elevated character. for, though they have thrown off certain errors, the general discipline of their minds, intellectually and morally, is not altered. i am now convinced, that no great improvements in the lot of mankind are possible, until a great change takes place in the fundamental constitution of their modes of thought. the old opinions in religion, morals, and politics, are so much discredited in the more intellectual minds as to have lost the greater part of their efficacy for good, while they have still life enough in them to be a powerful obstacle to the growing up of any better opinions on those subjects. when the philosophic minds of the world can no longer believe its religion, or can only believe it with modifications amounting to an essential change of its character, a transitional period commences, of weak convictions, paralysed intellects, and growing laxity of principle, which cannot terminate until a renovation has been effected in the basis of their belief leading to the evolution of some faith, whether religious or merely human, which they can really believe: and when things are in this state, all thinking or writing which does not tend to promote such a renovation, is of very little value beyond the moment. since there was little in the apparent condition of the public mind, indicative of any tendency in this direction, my view of the immediate prospects of human improvement was not sanguine. more recently a spirit of free speculation has sprung up, giving a more encouraging prospect of the gradual mental emancipation of england; and concurring with the renewal under better auspices, of the movement for political freedom in the rest of europe, has given to the present condition of human affairs a more hopeful aspect.
for a considerable time after this i published no large work, though i still occasionally wrote in periodicals, and my correspondence (much of it with persons quite unknown to me) on subjects of public interest swelled to a considerable bulk. during these years i wrote or started various essays, for eventual publication, on some of the fundamental questions of human and social life, with regard to several of which i have already much exceeded the severity of the horatian precept that a writer should keep his work for at least nine years before publishing it. i continued to watch with keen interest the progress of public events. but on the whole it was not very encouraging to me. the european reaction after 1848, and the success of an unprincipled usurper in december 1851 seemed to put an end to all present hope for freedom or social improvement in france and the continent. in england, i had seen and continued to see many of the opinions of my youth obtain general recognition, and many of the reforms in institutions for which i had through life contended either carried out or in the course of being so. but these changes had brought much less benefit to human well-being than i would formerly have expected, because they had produced very little improvement in that which all real improvement in the life of mankind depends on, namely their intellectual and moral state; and it may even be that the various causes of deterioration that had been at work in the meantime had more than counterbalanced the tendencies to improvement. i had learned from experience that many false opinions can be replaced by true ones without in the least altering the habits of mind of which false opinions are the result. the english public, for example, are quite as raw and undiscerning on subjects of political economy since the nation has been converted to free-trade as they were before; and they are still further from having acquired better habits of thought and feeling or being in any way better fortified against error -on subjects of a more elevated character. they have thrown off certain errors, but the general intellectual and moral discipline of their minds is not altered. i am now convinced that no great improvements in the lot of mankind are possible until a great change takes place in the basic constitution of their ways of thinking. the old opinions in religion, morals, and politics are so much discredited in the more intellectual minds as to have lost most of their efficacy for good, while they have still life enough in them to be a powerful obstacle to the growth of better opinions on those subjects. when the philosophic minds of the world can no longer believe its religion, or can only believe it with modifications amounting to an essential change of its character, that starts a transitional period of weak convictions, paralysed intellects, and growing laxity of principle, which cannot end until the basis of their belief has undergone a renovation leading to the rise of some faith whether religious or merely human which they can really believe; and when things are in this state, all thinking or writing that does not tend to promote such a renovation is of little value beyond the moment. since the apparent condition of the public mind offered little to indicate any tendency in this direction, my view of the immediate prospects of human improvement was not optimistic. more recently a spirit of free theorising has sprung up, giving a more encouraging prospect for the gradual mental emancipation of england; and coinciding with the more promising renewal of the movement for political freedom in the rest of europe, it has given a more hopeful aspect to the present condition of human affairs.

between the time of which i have now spoken, and the present, took place the most important events of my private life. the first of these was my marriage, in april, 1851, to the lady whose incomparable worth had made her friendship the greatest source to me both of happiness and of improvement, during many years in which we never expected to be in any closer relation to one another. ardently as i should have aspired to this complete union of our lives at any time in the course of my existence at which it had been practicable, i, as much as my wife, would far rather have foregone that privilege for ever, than have owed it to the premature death of one for whom i had the sincerest respect, and she the strongest affection. that event, however, having taken place in july, 1849, it was granted to me to derive from that evil my own greatest good, by adding to the partnership of thought, feeling, and writing which had long existed, a partnership of our entire existence. for seven and a-half years that blessing was mine; for seven and a-half only! i can say nothing which could describe, even in the faintest manner, what that loss was and is. but because i know that she would have wished it, i endeavour to make the best of what life i have left, and to work on for her purposes with such diminished strength as can be derived from thoughts of her, and communion with her memory.
two events involving my wife since the time of which i have now spoken the most important events of my private life took place. the first of these was my marriage in april 1851 to the lady whose incomparable worth had made her friendship the greatest source to me of happiness and of improvement during many years in which we never expected to be in any closer relation to one another. ardently as i should have aspired to this complete union of our lives at any time at which it had been practicable, my wife and i would both far rather have forgone that privilege for ever than have owed it to the premature death of one for whom i had the sincerest respect, and she the strongest affection. that event, however, having taken place in july 1849, it was granted to me to derive from that evil my own greatest good by adding to the partnership of thought, feeling, and writing that had long existed a partnership of our entire existence. for seven and a half years that blessing was mine; for seven and a half only! i can say nothing that could describe even faintly what that loss was and is. but because i know that she would have wished it, i try to make the best of what life i have left, and to go on working for her purposes with whatever lessened strength i can derive from thoughts of her and communion with her memory.

when two persons have their thoughts and speculations completely in common; when all subjects of intellectual or moral interest are discussed between them in daily life, and probed to much greater depths than are usually or conveniently sounded in writings intended for general readers; when they set out from the same principles, and arrive at their conclusions by processes pursued jointly, it is of little consequence in respect to the question of originality, which of them holds the pen; the one who contributes least to the composition may contribute more to the thought; the writings which result are the joint product of both, and it must often be impossible to disentangle their respective parts, and affirm that this belongs to one and that to the other. in this wide sense, not only during the years of our married life, but during many of the years of confidential friendship which preceded, all my published writings were as much here work as mine; her share in them constantly increasing as years advanced. but in certain cases, what belongs to her can be distinguished, and specially identified. over and above the general influence which her mind had over mine, the most valuable ideas and features in these joint productions those which have been most fruitful of important results, and have contributed most to the success and reputation of the works themselves originated with her, were emanations from her mind, my part in them being no greater than in any of the thoughts which i found in previous writers, and made my own only by incorporating them with my own system of thought! during the greater part of my literary life i have performed the office in relation to her, which from a rather early period i had considered as the most useful part that i was qualified to take in the domain of thought, that of an interpreter of original thinkers, and mediator between them and the public; for i had always a humble opinion of my own powers as an original thinker, except in abstract science (logic, metaphysics, and the theoretic principles of political economy and politics), but thought myself much superior to most of my contemporaries in willingness and ability to learn from everybody; as i found hardly anyone who made such a point of examining what was said in defence of all opinions, however new or however old, in the conviction that even if they were errors there might be a substratum of truth underneath them, and that in any case the discovery of what it was that made them plausible, would be a benefit to truth. i had, in consequence, marked this out as a sphere of usefulness in which i was under a special obligation to make myself active; the more so, as the acquaintance i had formed with the ideas of the coleridgians, of the german thinkers, and of carlyle, all of them fiercely opposed to the mode of thought in which i had been brought up, had convinced me that along with much error they possessed much truth, which was veiled from minds otherwise capable of receiving it by the transcendental and mystical phraseology in which they were accustomed to shut it up, and from which they neither cared, nor knew how, to disengage it; and i did not despair of separating the truth from the error, and exposing it in terms which would be intelligible and not repulsive to those on my own side in philosophy. thus prepared, it will easily be believed that when i came into close intellectual communion with a person of the most eminent faculties, whose genius, as it grew and unfolded itself in thought, continually struck out truths far in advance of me, but in which i could not, as i had done in those others, detect any mixture of error, the greatest part of my mental growth consisted in the assimilation of those truths, and the most valuable part of my intellectual work was in building the bridges and clearing the paths which connected them with my general system of thought.
when two persons have their thoughts and speculations completely in common; when all subjects of intellectual or moral interest are discussed between them in daily life, and probed to much greater depths than are usually or conveniently sounded in writings intended for general readers; when they set out from the same principles, and arrive at their conclusions by processes pursued jointly; it is of little consequence in respect to the question of originality which of them holds the pen. the one who contributes least to the composition may contribute most to the thought; the writings that result are the joint product of both, and it must often be impossible to disentangle their respective parts and affirm that this belongs to one and that to the other. in this wide sense all my published writings not only during the years of our married life, but during the many years of confidential friendship that preceded it were as much my wife's work as mine, her share in them constantly increasing as years advanced. but in certain cases what belongs to her can be distinguished and specially identified. over and above the general influence her mind had over mine, the most valuable ideas and features in these joint productions those that have been most fruitful of important results, and have contributed most to the success and reputation of the works themselves originated with her, were emanations from her mind. my part in them was no greater than in any of the thoughts i found in previous writers and made my own only by incorporating them into my own system of thought. during the greater part of my literary life i have performed in relation to her the office which from a rather early period i had considered as the most useful part i was qualified to take in the domain of thought, that of an interpreter of original thinkers and mediator between them and the public. i always had a humble opinion of my own powers as an original thinker except in abstract science (logic, metaphysics, and the theoretic principles of political economy and politics), but i thought myself much superior to most of my contemporaries in willingness and ability to learn from everybody; as i found hardly anyone who made such a point of examining what was said in defence of all opinions, however new or however old, in the conviction that even if they were errors there might be a substratum of truth underneath them and that in any case the discovery of what made them plausible would be a benefit to truth. so i had marked out this as a sphere of usefulness in which i was under a special obligation to make myself active, the more so because the acquaintance i had formed with the ideas of the coleridgians, of the german thinkers, and of carlyle, all of them fiercely opposed to the mode of thought in which i had been brought up, had convinced me that along with much error they possessed much truth. it was veiled from minds otherwise capable of receiving it by the transcendental and mystical phraseology in which they were accustomed to shut it up, and from which they did not want and did not know how to disengage it; and i did not despair of separating the truth from the error, and expressing it in terms that would be intelligible and not repulsive to those on my own side in philosophy. it will easily be believed that when i, thus prepared, came into close intellectual communion with a person of the most eminent faculties, whose genius as it grew and unfolded itself in thought continually struck out truths far in advance of me, but in which i could not (as i had done in those others) detect any mixture of error, the greatest part of my mental growth consisted in the assimilation of those truths, and the most valuable part of my intellectual work was in building the bridges and clearing the paths that connected them with my general system of thought. the steps in my mental growth for which i was indebted to her were far from being those that a person wholly uninformed on the subject would probably suspect. it might be supposed, for instance, that my strong convictions on the complete equality that ought to exist between men and women in all legal, political, social and domestic relations may have been adopted or learned from her. this was so far from being the fact that those convictions were among the earliest results of my thinking on political subjects; and i think the strength with which i held them was the main originating cause of the interest she felt in me. what is true is that until i knew her the opinion was little more than an abstract principle in my mind. i saw no more reason why women should be held in legal subjection to other people than why men should. i was certain that their interests required just as much protection as men's, and were unlikely to obtain it without an equal voice in making the laws by which they are to be bound. but the perception of the vast practical bearings of women's disabilities that found expression in the book on the subjection of women was acquired mainly through her teaching. without her rare knowledge of human nature and comprehension of moral and social influences, i would doubtless have held my present opinions but i would have had a very insufficient perception of how the consequences of women's inferior position intertwine themselves with all the evils of existing society and with all the difficulties of human improvement. i was indeed painfully conscious how much of her best thoughts on the subject i have failed to reproduce, and how greatly that little treatise falls short of what would have been if she had put on paper her entire mind on this question, or had lived to revise and improve my imperfect statement of the case, as she certainly would have done.

the first of my books in which her share was conspicious was the principles of political economy. the system of logic owed little to her except in the minuter matters of composition, in which respect my writings, both great and small, have largely benefited by her accurate and clear-sighted criticism. the chapter of the political econonomy
the principles of political economy the first of my books in which her share was conspicuous was the principles of political economy. the system of logic owed little to her except in the minuter matters of composition, in which respect my writings, both great and small, have greatly benefited by her accurate and clearsighted criticism. the only person from whom i received any direct assistance in preparing the system of logic was mr bain, since so justly celebrated for his philosophical writings. he went carefully through the manuscript before it was sent to press, and enriched it with a great number of additional examples and illustrations from science. i inserted many of these, as well as some detached remarks of his own in confirmation of my logical views, nearly in his own words.

which has had a greater influence on opinion than all the rest, that on the probable future of the labouring classes, is entirely due to her; in the first draft of the book, that chapter did not exist. she pointed out the need of such a chapter, and the extreme imperfection of the book without it; she was the cause of my writing it; and the more general part of the chapter, the statement and discussion of the two opposite theories respecting the proper condition of the labouring classes, was wholly an exposition of her thoughts, often in words taken from her own lips. the purely scientific part of the political economy i did not learn from her; but it was chiefly her influence that gave to the book that general tone by which it is distinguished from all previous expositions of political economy that had any pretension to being scientific, and which has made it so useful in conciliating minds which those previous expositions had repelled. this tone consisted chiefly in making the proper distinction between the laws of the production of wealth which are laws of nature, dependent on the properties of objects and the modes of its distribution, which, subject to certain conditions, depend on human will. the commom run of political economists confuse these together, under the designation of economic laws, which they deem incapable of being defeated or modified by human effort; ascribing the same necessity to things dependent on the unchangeable conditions of our earthly existence, and to those which, being but the necessary consequences of particular social arrangements, are merely co-extensive with these; given certain institutions and customs, wages, profits, and rent will be determined by certain causes; but this class of political economists drop the indispensable presupposition, and argue that these causes must, by an inherent necessity, against which no human means can avail, determine the shares which fall, in the division of the produce, to labourers, capitalists, and landlords. the principles of political economy yielded to none of its predecessors in aiming at the scientific appreciation of the action of these causes, under the conditions which they presuppose; but it set the example of not treating those conditions as final. the economic generalizations which depend not on necessaties of nature but on those combined with the existing arrangements of society, it deals with only as provisional, and as liable to be much altered by the progress of social improvement. i had indeed partially learnt this view of things from the thoughts awakened in me by the speculations of the st. simonians; but it was made a living principle pervading and animating the book by my wife's promptings. this example illustrates well the general character of what she contributed to my writings. what was abstract and purely scientific was generally mine; the properly human element came from her: in all that concerned the application of philosophy to the exigencies of human society and progress, i was her pupil, alike in boldness of speculation and cautiousness of practical judgment. for, on the one hand, she was much more courageous and far-sighted than without her i should have been, in anticipation of an order of things to come, in which many of the limited generalizations now so often confounded with universal principles will cease to be applicable. those parts of my writings, and especially of the political economy, which contemplate possibilities in the future such as, when affirmed by socialists, have in general been fiercely denied by political economists, would, but for her, either have been absent, or the suggestions would have been made much more timidly and in a more qualified form. but while she thus rendered me bolder in speculation on human affairs, her practical turn of mind, and her almost unerring estimate of practical obstacles, repressed in me all tendencies that were really visionary. her mind invested all ideas in a concrete shape, and formed to itself a conception of how they would actually work: and her knowledge of the existing feelings and conduct of mankind was so seldom at fault, that the weak point in any unworkable suggestion seldom escapes her.
the chapter of the political economy that has had a greater influence on opinion than all the rest, namely the one on the probable future of the labouring classes, is entirely due to her. in the first draft of the book that chapter did not exist. she pointed out the need for such a chapter and the extreme imperfection of the book without it. she was the cause of my writing it; and the more general part of the chapter the statement and discussion of the two opposite theories concerning the proper condition of the labouring classes was wholly an exposition of her thoughts, often in her own words. i did not learn the purely scientific part of the political economy from her; but it was chiefly her influence that gave the book the general tone that distinguishes it from all previous expositions of political economy that had any claim to being scientific, and has made it so useful in conciliating minds that those previous expositions had repelled. this tone consisted chiefly in properly distinguishing (1) the laws of the production of wealth, which are real laws of nature that depend on the properties of objects, from (2) the modes of its distribution, which subject to certain conditions depend on human will. the common run of political economists run these together under the label economic laws, which they think cannot be defeated or modified by human effort; ascribing the same necessity to (1) things that depend on the unchangeable conditions of our earthly existence as to (2) those that are merely the necessary consequences of particular social arrangements. given certain institutions and customs, wages, profits, and rent will be determined by certain causes; but this class of political economists drop the indispensable presupposition and argue that these causes must, by an inherent necessity against which no human means can avail, determine the shares in the division of the product that fall to labourers, capitalists, and landlords. the principles of political economy yielded to none of its predecessors in aiming at the scientific appreciation of the action of these causes, under the conditions they presuppose; but it set the example of not treating those conditions as final. it treats only as provisional and liable to be much altered by the progress of social improvement the economic generalisations that depend not on (1) necessities of nature but on those combined with (2) the existing arrangements of society. i had indeed partially learned this view of things from the thoughts awakened in me by the theorising of the st. simonians; but my wife's promptings are what made it a living principle pervading and animating the book. this example illustrates well the general character of what she contributed to my writings. what was abstract and purely scientific was generally mine; the properly human element came from her. in all that concerned the application of philosophy to the demands of human society and progress, i was her pupil in boldness of thinking and in cautiousness of practical judgment. for, on the one hand, she was much more courageous and far-sighted than i would have been without her, in anticipations of an order of things to come in which many of the limited generalisations now so often confused with universal principles will cease to be applicable. the parts of my writings especially of the political economy that contemplate possibilities in the future such as have in general been fiercely denied by political economists when affirmed by socialists would have been either absent expressed much more timidly and in a more qualified form if it were not for her. but, on the other hand, while she thus made me bolder in speculation on human affairs, her practical turn of mind and her almost unerring estimate of practical obstacles repressed in me all tendencies that were really visionary. her mind invested all ideas in a concrete shape, and formed to itself a conception of how they would actually work; and her knowledge of the existing feelings and conduct of mankind was so seldom at fault that the weak point in any unworkable suggestion seldom escaped her.

since then i have sought for such allevation as my state admitted of, by the mode of life which most enabled me to feel her still near me. i bought a cottage as close as possible to the place where she is buried, and there her daughter (my fellow-sufferer and now my chief comfort) and i, live constantly during a great portion of the year. my objects in life are solely those which were hers; my pursuits and occupations those in which she shared, or sympathized, and which are indissolubly associated with her. her memory is to me a religion, and her approbation the standard by which, summing up as it does all worthiness, i endeavour to regulate my life. after my irreparable loss, one of my earliest cares was to print and publish the treatise, so much of which was the work of her whom i had lost, and consecrate it to her memory. i have made no alteration or addition to it, nor shall i ever. though it wants the last touch of her hand, no substitute for that touch shall ever be attempted by mine.
after my irreparable loss, one of my first concerns was to print and publish the treatise so much of which was the work of her whom i had lost, and to consecrate it to her memory. i have made no alteration or addition to it, nor shall i ever. though it needed the last touch of her hand, no substitute for that touch will ever be attempted by mine.

after my irreparable loss, one of my earliest cares was to print and publish the treatise, so much of which was the work of her whom i had lost, and consecrate it to her memory. i have made no alteration or addition to it, nor shall i ever. though it wants the last touch of her hand, no substitute for that touch shall ever be attempted by mine.
parliamentary reform

the political circumstances of the time induced me, shortly after, to complete and publish a pamphlet (thoughts on parliamentary reform), part of which had been written some years previously on the occasion of one of the abortive reform bills, and had at the time been approved and revised by her. its principal features were, hostility to the ballot (a change of opinion in both of us, in which she rather preceded me), and a claim of representation for minorities; not, however, at that time going beyond the cumulative vote proposed by mr. garth marshall. in finishing the pamphlet for publication, with a view to the discussions on the reform bill of lord derby's and mr. disraeli's government in 1859, i added a third feature, a plurality of votes, to be given, not to property, but to proved superiority of education. this recommended itself to me as a means of reconciling the irresistible claim of every man or woman to be consulted, and to be allowed a voice, in the regulation of affairs which vitally concern them, with the superiority of weight justly due to opinions grounded on superiority of knowledge. the suggestion, however, was one which i had never discussed with my almost infallible counsellor, and i have no evidence that she would have concurred in it. as far as i have been able to observe, it has found favour with nobody; all who desire any sort of inequality in the electoral vote, desiring it in favour of property and not of intelligence or knowledge. if it ever overcomes the strong feeling which exists against it, this will only be after the establishment of a systematic national education by which the various grades of politically valuable acquirement may be accurately defined and authenticated. without this it will always remain liable to strong, possibly conclusive, objections; and with this, it would perhaps not be needed.
a little later the political circumstances of the time induced me to complete and publish a pamphlet (thoughts on parliamentary reform) part of which had been written some years earlier on the occasion of one of the abortive reform bills, and had at that time been approved and revised by her. its principal features were (1) hostility to the ballot (a change of opinion in both of us, in which she rather preceded me), and (2) a claim of representation for minorities though not at that time going beyond the cumulative vote proposed by mr garth marshall. in finishing the pamphlet for publication with a view to the discussions on the reform bill of lord derby's and mr disraeli's government in 1859, i added a third feature, (3) a plurality of votes to be given not to property but to proved superiority of education. this recommended itself to me as a means of reconciling the irresistible claim of every man or woman to be consulted and allowed a voice in the regulation of affairs which vitally concern them with the greater weight justly due to opinions based on greater knowledge. but i had never discussed this suggestion with my almost infallible counsellor, and i have no evidence that she would have agreed with it. as far as i have been able to observe, it has found favour with nobody. all who desire any sort of inequality in the electoral vote want it in favour of property and not of intelligence or knowledge. if it ever overcomes the strong feeling that exists against it, this will only be after the establishment of a systematic national education by which the various grades of politically valuable acquirement can be accurately defined and authenticated. without this it will always remain liable to strong and possibly conclusive objections; and with this, it would perhaps not be needed.

it was soon after the publication of thoughts on parliamentary reform, that i became acquainted with mr. hare's admirable system of personal representation, which, in its present shape, was then for the first time published. i saw in this great practical and philosophical idea, the greatest improvement of which the system of representative government is susceptible; an improvement which, in the most felicitous manner, exactly meets and cures the grand, and what before seemed the inherent, defect of the representative system; that of giving to a numerical majority all power, instead of only a power proportional to its numbers, and enabling the strongest party to exclude all weaker parties from making their opinions heard in the assembly of the nation, except through such opportunity as may be given to them by the accidentally unequal distribution of opinions in different localities. to these great evils nothing more than very imperfect palliations had seemed possible; but mr. hare's system affords a radical cure. this great discovery, for it is no less, in the political art, inspired me, as i believe it has inspired all thoughtful persons who have adopted it, with new and more sanguine hopes respecting the prospects of human society; by freeing the form of political institutions towards which the whole civilized world is manifestly and irresistibly tending, from the chief part of what seemed to qualify, or render doubtful, its ultimate benefits. minorities, so long as they remain minorities, are, and ought to be, outvoted; but under arrangements which enable any assemblage of voters, amounting to a certain number, to place in the legislature a representative of its own choice, minorities cannot be suppressed. independent opinions will force their way into the council of the nation and make themselves heard there, a thing which often cannot happen in the existing forms of representative democracy; and the legislature, instead of being weeded of individual peculiarities and entirely made up of men who simply represent the creed of great political or religious parties, will comprise a large proportion of the most eminent individual minds in the country, placed there, without reference to party, by voters who appreciate their individual eminence. i can understand that persons, otherwise intelligent, should, for want of sufficient examination, be repelled from mr. hare's plan by what they think the complex nature of its machinery. but any one who does not feel the want which the scheme is intended to supply; any one who throws it over as a mere theoretical subtlety or crotchet, tending to no valuable purpose, and unworthy of the attention of practical men, may be pronounced an incompetent statesman, unequal to the politics of the future. i mean, unless he is a minister or aspires to become one: for we are quite accustomed to a minister continuing to profess unqualified hostility to an improvement almost to the very day when his conscience or his interest induces him to take it up as a public measure, and carry it.
it was soon after the publication of thoughts on parliamentary reform that i became acquainted with mr hare's admirable system of personal representation, which in its present shape had just been published for the first time. i saw this great practical and philosophical idea as the greatest improvement of which the system of representative government is susceptible; an improvement which in the most felicitous manner exactly meets and cures the grand (and what before seemed the inherent) defect of the representative system, namely that of giving to a numerical majority all power instead of only a power proportional to its numbers, enabling the strongest party to exclude all weaker parties from making their opinions heard in the assembly of the nation except through whatever opportunities they may get from the accidentally unequal distribution of opinions in different localities. to these great evils nothing more than very imperfect palliatives had seemed possible, but mr hare's system provides a radical cure. this great discovery (for that's what it is) in the political art inspired me, as i believe it has inspired all thoughtful persons who have adopted it, with new and more optimistic hopes for the prospects of human society. it does this by freeing the form of political institutions towards which the whole civilised world is manifestly and irresistibly tending namely democracy from the chief part of what seemed to qualify or make doubtful its ultimate benefits. minorities, so long as they remain minorities, are and should be outvoted; but under arrangements that enable any assemblage of voters amounting to a certain number to place in the legislature a representative of its own choice, minorities cannot be suppressed. independent opinions will force their way into the council of the nation and make themselves heard there, which often cannot happen in the existing forms of representative democracy; and the legislature, instead of being entirely made up of men who simply represent the creed of great political or religious parties, with individual peculiarities weeded out, will include a large proportion of the most eminent individual minds in the country, placed there without reference to party by voters who appreciate their individual eminence. i can understand that otherwise intelligent persons might, through not having examined it carefully, be repelled from mr hare's plan by what they think to be the complex nature of its machinery. but anyone who does not feel the need that the scheme is intended to meet, anyone who throws it over as a mere theoretical subtlety or whimsical fancy, tending to no valuable purpose and unworthy of the attention of practical men, may be pronounced an incompetent statesman and unequal to the politics of the future. i mean unless he is a minister or aspires to become one; for we are quite accustomed to a minister continuing to profess unqualified hostility to an improvement almost to the very day when his conscience or his self-interest induces him to take it up as a public measure and carry it.

had i met with mr. hare's system before the publication of my pamphlet, i should have given an account of it there. not having done so, i wrote an article in fraser's magazine (reprinted in my miscellaneous writings) principally for that purpose, though i included in it, along with mr. hare's book, a review of two other productions on the question of the day; one of them a pamphlet by my early friend, mr. john austin, who had in his old age become an enemy to all further parliamentary reform; the other an able and vigourous, though partially erroneous, work by mr. lorimer.
had i met with mr hare's system before the publication of my pamphlet i would have given an account of it there. not having done so, i wrote an article in fraser's magazine (reprinted in my miscellaneous writings) principally for that purpose, though i included in it along with mr hare's book a review of two other productions on the question of the day a pamphlet by my early friend mr john austin, who had in his old age become an enemy to all further parliamentary reform, and an able and ingenious though partially erroneous work by mr lorimer.

in the course of the same summer i fulfilled a duty particularly incumbent upon me, that of helping (by an article in the edinburgh review) to make known mr. bain's profound treatise on the mind, just then completed by the publication of its second volume. and i carried through the press a selection of my minor writings, forming the first two volumes of dissertations and discussions. the selection had been made during my wife's lifetime, but the revision, in concert with her, with a view to republication, had been barely commenced; and when i had no longer the guidance of her judgment i despaired of pursuing it further, and republished the papers as they were, with the exception of striking out such passages as were no longer in accordance with my opinions. my literary work of the year was terminated with an essay in fraser's magazine (afterwards republished in the third volume of dissertations and discussions), entitled a few words on non-intervention. i was prompted to write this paper by a desire, while vindicating england from the imputations commonly brought against her on the continent, of a peculiar selfishness in matters of foreign policy to warn englishmen of the colour given to this imputation by the low tone in which english statesmen are accustomed to speak of english policy as concerned only with english interests, and by the conduct of lord palmerston at that particular time in opposing the suez canal; and i took the opportunity of expressing ideas which had long been in my mind (some of them generated by my indian experience, and others by the international questions which then greatly occupied the european public), respecting the true principles of international morality, and the legitimate modifications made in it by difference of times and circumstances; a subject i had already, to some extent, discussed in the vindication of the french provisional government of 1848 against the attacks of lord brougham and others, which i published at the time in the westminster review, and which is reprinted in the dissertations.
other writings in the course of the same summer i fulfilled a duty particularly incumbent on me, that of helping (by an article in the edinburgh review) to make known mr bain's profound treatise on the mind, just then completed by the publication of its second volume. and i carried through the press a selection of my minor writings, forming the first two volumes of dissertations and discussions. the selection had been made during my wife's lifetime, but the revision we planned to do with a view to republication had been barely started; and when i no longer had the guidance of her judgment i despaired of pursuing it further, and republished the papers as they were, except for deleting passages that were no longer in accordance with my opinions. my last literary work of the year was an essay in fraser's magazine (afterwards republished in the third volume of dissertations and discussions) entitled a few words on non-intervention. i was prompted to write this paper by a desire while defending england from the imputations (commonly brought against her on the continent) of a special selfishness in matters of foreign policy to warn englishmen that this imputation gains plausibility from the low tone in which english statesmen are accustomed to speak of english policy as being concerned only with english interests, and from the conduct of lord palmerston at that time in opposing the suez canal. and i took the opportunity to express ideas that had long been in my mind (some generated by my indian experience, others by the international questions that then greatly occupied the european public) concerning the true principles of international morality, and what changes can legitimately be made in it by difference of times and circumstances. i had already discussed this topic somewhat in the defence of the french provisional government of 1848 against the attacks of lord brougham and others, which i published at the time in the westminster review, and which is reprinted in the dissertations.

i had now settled, as i believed, for the remainder of my existence into a purely literary life; if that can be called literary which continued to be occupied in a pre-eminent degree with politics, and not merely with theoretical, but practical politics, although a great part of the year was spent at a distance of many hundred miles from the chief seat of the politics of my own country, to which, and primarily for which, i wrote. but, in truth, the modern facilities of communication have not only removed all the disadvantages, to a political writer in tolerably easy circumstances, of distance from the scene of political action, but have converted them into advantages. the immediate and regular receipt of newspapers and periodicals keeps him au courant of even the most temporary politics, and gives him a much more correct view of the state and progress of opinion than he could acquire by personal contact with individuals: for every one's social intercourse is more or less limited to particular sets or classes, whose impressions and no others reach him through that channel; and experience has taught me that those who give their time to the absorbing claims of what is called society, not having leisure to keep up a large acquaintance with the organs of opinion, remain much more ignorant of the general state either of the public mind, or of the active and instructed part of it, than a recluse who reads the newspapers need be. there are, no doubt, disadvantages in too long a separation from one's country in not occasionally renewing one's impressions of the light in which men and things appear when seen from a position in the midst of them; but the deliberate judgment formed at a distance, and undisturbed by inequalities of perspective, is the most to be depended on, even for application to practice. alternating between the two positions, i combined the advantages of both. and, though the inspirer of my best thoughts was no longer with me, i was not alone: she had left a daughter, my stepdaughter,
working from avignon i had now settled (i thought) for the remainder of my existence into a purely literary life; if i can call literary something that continued to be occupied primarily with politics and not merely with theoretical but practical politics although a great part of each was spent hundreds of miles from the chief seat of the politics of my own country, to which i wrote and primarily for which i wrote. in fact, the modern facilities of communication, for a political writer in tolerably easy circumstances, have not only removed all the disadvantages of distance from the scene of political action but have turned them into advantages. the immediate and regular receipt of newspapers and periodicals keeps him up to date with even the most temporary politics, and gives him a much more correct view of the state and progress of opinion than he could acquire by personal contact with individuals; for everyone's social intercourse is more or less limited to particular sets or classes, whose impressions are the only ones to reach him through that channel; and experience has taught me that a recluse who reads the newspapers can be much less ignorant of the general state of the public mind (or of the active and instructed part of it) than those who give their time to the absorbing claims of society and don't have time to keep up a large acquaintance with the organs of opinion. there are, no doubt, disadvantages in too long a separation from one's country, in not occasionally renewing one's impressions of the light in which men and things appear when seen from a position in the midst of them. but the deliberate judgment formed at a distance and undisturbed by inequalities of perspective is more dependable, even for the application of theory to practice. alternating between the two positions, i combined the advantages of both. and, though the inspirer of my best thoughts was no longer with me, i was not alone: she had left a daughter, my stepdaughter miss helen taylor, the inheritor of much of her wisdom and all of her nobleness of character, whose ever growing and ripening talents from that day to this have been devoted to the same great purposes and have already made her name better and more widely known than her mother's was, though i predict that it is destined to become even more so if she lives. of the value of her direct cooperation with me something will be said later, but it would be vain to try to give an adequate idea of what i owe in the way of instruction to her great powers of original thought and soundness of practical judgment. surely no-one ever before was so fortunate as i was, after such a loss as mine, drawing another prize in the lottery of life another companion, stimulator, adviser, and instructor of the rarest quality. anyone who ever thinks of me and of the work i have done must not forget that it is the product not of one intellect and conscience but of three, of whom the least considerable and above all the least original is the one whose name is attached to it.

the work of the years 1860 and 1861 consisted chiefly of two treatises, only one of which was intended for immediate publication. this was the considerations on representative government; a connected exposition of what, by the thoughts of many years, i had come to regard as the best form of a popular constitution. along with as much of the general theory of government as is necessary to support this particular portion of its practice, the volume contains many matured views of the principal questions which occupy the present age, within the province of purely organic institutions, and raises, by anticipation, some other questions to which growing necessities will sooner or later compel the attention both of theoretical and of practical politicians. the chief of these last, is the distinction between the function of making laws, for which a numerous popular assembly is radically unfit, and that of getting good laws made, which is its proper duty and cannot be satisfactorily fulfilled by any other authority: and the consequent need of a legislative commission, as a permanent part of the constitution of a free country; consisting of a small number of highly trained political minds, on whom, when parliament has determined that a law shall be made, the task of making it should be devolved: parliament retaining the power of passing or rejecting the bill when drawn up, but not of altering it otherwise than by sending proposed amendments to be dealt with by the commission. the question here raised respecting the most important of all public functions, that of legislation, is a particular case of the great problem of modern political organization, stated, i believe, for the first time in its full extent by bentham, though in my opinion not always satisfactorily resolved by him; the combination of complete popular control over public affairs, with the greatest attainable perfection of skilled agency.
the work of the years 1860 and 1861 consisted chiefly of two treatises, only one of which was intended for immediate publication. this was the considerations on representative government, a connected exposition of what the thoughts of many years had led me to regard as the best form of a popular constitution. along with as much of the general theory of government as is necessary to support this particular portion of its practice, the volume contains many matured views of the principal questions that occupy the present age, within the province of purely organic institutions, and raises in advance some other questions to which growing necessities will sooner or later compel the attention both of theoretical and of practical politicians. the chief of these questions concerns the distinction between the function of making laws, for which a numerous popular assembly is radically unfit, and the function of getting good laws made, which is the popular assembly's proper duty and cannot be satisfactorily fulfilled by any other authority. this requires that there be a legislative commission, as a permanent part of the constitution of a free country; consisting of a small number of highly trained political minds whose role when parliament has determined that a law shall be made is to make it; parliament retaining the power of passing or rejecting the bill when drawn up, but not of altering it otherwise than by sending proposed amendments to be dealt with by the commission. the issue concerning the most important of all public functions, that of legislation, is a particular case of the great problem of modern political organisation, stated (i believe) for the first time in its full extent by bentham, though in my opinion not always satisfactorily resolved by him namely the problem of combining complete popular control over public affairs with the greatest attainable perfection of skilled agency.

the other treatise written at this time is the one which was published some years later under the title of the subjection of women. it was written that there might, in any event, be in existence a written exposition of my opinions on that great question, as full and conclusive as i could make it. the intention was to keep this among other unpublished papers, improving it from time to time if i was able, and to publish it at the time when it should seem likely to be most useful. as ultimately published in what was of my own composition, all that is most striking and profound belongs to my wife; coming from the fund of thought which had been made common to us both, by our innumerable conversations and discussions on a topic which filled so large a place in our minds.
the subjection of women the other treatise written at this time was published some years later under the title the subjection of women. it was written at my daughter's suggestion that there should be in existence a written exposition as full and conclusive as i could make it of my opinions on that great question. the intention was to keep this among other unpublished papers, improving it from time to time if i was able, and to publish it at the time when it seemed likely to be most useful. as ultimately published it was enriched with some important ideas of my daughter's and some passages of her writing. but all that is most striking and profound in what was written by me belongs to my wife, coming from the fund of thought that had been made common to us both by our innumerable conversations and discussions on a topic that filled so large a place in our minds.

soon after this time i took from their repository a portion of the unpublished papers which i had written during the last years of our married life, and shaped them, with some additional matter, into the little work entitled utilitarianism; which was first published, in three parts, in successive numbers of fraser's magazine, and afterwards reprinted in a volume.
soon after this time i took from their repository a portion of the unpublished papers i had written during the last years of our married life, and shaped them with some additional matter into the little work entitled utilitarianism, which was first published in three parts in consecutive numbers of fraser's magazine and later reprinted in a volume.

before this, however, the state of public affairs had become extremely critical, by the commencement of the american civil war. my strongest feelings were engaged in this struggle, which, i felt from the beginning, was destined to be a turning point, for good or evil, of the course of human affairs for an indefinite duration. having been a deeply interested observer of the slavery quarrel in america, during the many years that preceded the open breach, i knew that it was in all its stages an aggressive enterprise of the slave-owners to extend the territory of slavery; under the combined influences of pecuniary interest, domineering temper, and the fanaticism of a class for its class privileges, influences so fully and powerfully depicted in the admirable work of my friend professor cairnes, the slave power. their success, if they succeeded, would be a victory of the powers of evil which would give courage to the enemies of progress and damp the spirits of its friends all over the civilized world, while it would create a formidable military power, grounded on the worst and most anti-social form of the tyranny of men over men, and, by destroying for a long time the prestige of the great democratic republic, would give to all the privileged classes of europe a false confidence, probably only to be extinguished in blood. on the other hand, if the spirit of the north was sufficiently roused to carry the war to a successful termination, and if that termination did not come too soon and too easily, i foresaw, from the laws of human nature, and the experience of revolutions, that when it did come it would in all probability be thorough: that the bulk of the northern population, whose conscience had as yet been awakened only to the point of resisting the further extension of slavery, but whose fidelity to the constitution of the united states made them disapprove of any attempt by the federal government to interfere with slavery in the states where it already existed, would acquire feelings of another kind when the constitution had been shaken off by armed rebellion, would determine to have done for ever with the accursed thing, and would join their banner with that of the noble body of abolitionists, of whom garrison was the courageous and single-minded apostle, wendell phillips the eloquent orator, and john brown the voluntary martyr. then, too, the whole mind of the united states would be let loose from its bonds, no longer corrupted by the supposed necessity of apologizing to foreigners for the most flagrant of all possible violations of the free principles of their constitution; while the tendency of a fixed state of society to stereotype a set of national opinions would be at least temporarily checked, and the national mind would become more open to the recognition of whatever was bad in either the institutions or the customs of the people. these hopes, so far as related to slavery, have been completely, and in other respects are in course of being progressively realized. foreseeing from the first this double set of consequences from the success or failure of the rebellion, it may be imagined with what feelings i contemplated the rush of nearly the whole upper and middle classes of my own country even those who passed for liberals, into a furious pro-southern partisanship: the working classes, and some of the literary and scientific men, being almost the sole exceptions to the general frenzy. i never before felt so keenly how little permanent improvement had reached the minds of our influential classes, and of what small value were the liberal opinions they had got into the habit of professing. none of the continental liberals committed the same frightful mistake. but the generation which had extorted negro emancipation from our west india planters had passed away; another had succeeded which had not learnt by many years of discussion and exposure to feel strongly the enormities of slavery; and the inattention habitual with englishmen to whatever is going on in the world outside their own island, made them profoundly ignorant of all the antecedents of the struggle, insomuch that it was not generally believed in england, for the first year or two of the war, that the quarrel was one of slavery. there were men of high principle and unquestionable liberality of opinion, who thought it a dispute about tariffs, or assimilated it to the cases in which they were accustomed to sympathize, of a people struggling for independence.
before this, however, the state of public affairs had become extremely critical because of the outbreak of the american civil war. my strongest feelings were engaged in this struggle, which (i felt from the beginning) was destined to be a turning point, for good or evil, of the course of human affairs for an indefinite duration. having been a deeply interested observer of the slavery quarrel in america during the many years that preceded the open breach, i knew that the war was in all its stages an aggressive enterprise of the slave-owners to extend the territory of slavery, under the combined influences of financial interest, domineering temperament, and the fanaticism of a class for its class privileges influences so fully and powerfully depicted in the admirable work the slave power by my friend professor cairnes. if they succeeded, that would be a victory of the powers of evil that would give courage to the enemies of progress and damp the spirits of its friends all over the civilised world, while it would create a formidable military power based on the worst and most anti-social form of the tyranny of men over men, destroy for a long time the prestige of the great democratic republic, and thereby give to all the privileged classes of europe a false confidence that could probably be extinguished only in blood. on the other hand, if the spirit of the north was sufficiently roused to carry the war to a successful conclusion, and if that did not come too soon and too easily, i foresaw going by the laws of human nature and the experience of revolutions that when it did come it would probably be thorough: that the bulk of the northern population, whose conscience had so far been awakened only to the point of resisting the further extension of slavery, but whose fidelity to the constitution of the united states made them disapprove of any attempt by the federal government to interfere with slavery in the states where it already existed, would acquire feelings of another kind when the constitution had been shaken off by armed rebellion, would determine to have done for ever with the accursed thing, and would join their banner with that of the noble body of abolitionists, of whom garrison was the courageous and single-minded apostle, wendell phillips the eloquent orator, and john brown the voluntary martyr. then too the whole mind of the united states would be let loose from its bonds, no longer corrupted by the supposed necessity of apologising to foreigners for the most flagrant of all possible violations of the free principles of their constitution; while the tendency of a fixed state of society to perpetuate a set of national opinions would be at least temporarily checked, and the national mind would become more open to recognising whatever was bad in either the institutions or the customs of the people. these hopes have been completely realised with regard to slavery, and are in course of being progressively realised with regard to other matters. foreseeing from the first this double set of consequences from the success or failure of the rebellion, it may be imagined with what feelings i contemplated the rush of nearly the whole upper and middle classes of my own country even those who passed for liberals into a furious pro-southern partisanship, the only exceptions (almost) to the general frenzy being the working classes and some of the literary and scientific men. i never before felt so keenly how little permanent improvement had reached the minds of our influential classes, and of what small value were the liberal opinions they had acquired the habit of professing. none of the continental liberals committed the same frightful mistake. but the generation that had extorted negro emancipation from our west india planters had passed away; and the following generation had not learned by many years of discussion and exposure to feel strongly the wickedness of slavery; and englishmen's habitual inattention to whatever is happening in the world outside their own island made them profoundly ignorant of all the antecedents of the struggle, so that it was not generally believed in england, for the first year or two of the war, that the quarrel was about slavery. there were men of high principle and unquestionable liberality of opinion who thought it was a dispute about tariffs, or assimilated it to the cases in which they were accustomed to sympathise with people struggling for independence.

it was my obvious duty to be one of the small minority who protested against this perverted state of public opinion. i was not the first to protest. it ought to be remembered to the honour of mr. hughes and of mr. ludlow, that they, by writings published at the very beginning of the struggle, began the protestation. mr. bright followed in one of the most powerful of his speeches, followed by others not less striking. i was on the point of adding my words to theirs, when there occurred, towards the end of 1861, the seizure of the southern envoys on board a british vessel, by an officer of the united states. even english forgetfulness has not yet had time to lose all remembrance of the explosion of feeling in england which then burst forth, the expectation, prevailing for some weeks, of war with the united states, and the warlike preparations actually commenced on this side. while this state of things lasted, there was no chance of a hearing for anything favourable to the american cause; and, moreover, i agreed with those who thought the act unjustifiable, and such as to require that england should demand its disavowal. when the disavowal came, and the alarm of war was over, i wrote, in january, 1862, the paper, in fraser's magazine, entitled the contest in america, written and published when it was, this paper helped to encourage those liberals who had felt overborne by the tide of illiberal opinion, and to form in favour of the good cause a nucleus of opinion which increased gradually, and, after the success of the north began to seem probable, rapidly. when we returned from our journey i wrote a second article, a review of professor cairnes book, published in the westminster review. england is paying the penalty, in many uncomfortable ways, of the durable resentment which her ruling classes stirred up in the united states by their ostentatious wishes for the ruin of america as a nation; they have reason to be thankful that a few, if only a few, known writers and speakers, standing firmly by the americans in the time of their greatest difficulty, effected a partial diversion of these bitter feelings, and made great britain not altogether odious to the americans.
urging england not to support the south it was obviously my duty to be one of the small minority who protested against this perverted state of public opinion. i was not the first to protest. it ought to be remembered to the honour of mr hughes and of mr ludlow that they, by writings published at the very beginning of the struggle, began the protestation. mr bright followed in one of the most powerful of his speeches, followed by others not less striking. i was on the point of adding my words to theirs when there occurred, towards the end of 1861, the seizure of the southern envoys on board a british vessel by an officer of the united states. even english forgetfulness has not yet had time to lose all remembrance of the explosion of feeling in england which then burst forth, the expectation (prevailing for some weeks) of war with the united states, and the warlike preparations actually started on this side of the atlantic. while this state of things lasted there was no chance of a hearing for anything favourable to the american cause; and in fact i agreed with those who thought the act unjustifiable, and such as to require that england should demand its disavowal. when the disavowal came and the alarm of war was over i wrote, in january 1862, the paper in fraser's magazine entitled the contest in america. and i shall always feel grateful to my daughter that her urgency prevailed on me to write it when i did, for we were then on the point of setting out for a journey of some months in greece and turkey, and but for her i would have deferred writing till our return. written and published when it was, this paper helped to encourage liberals who had felt overborne by the tide of illiberal opinion, and to form in favour of the good cause a nucleus of opinion that increased gradually and then after the success of the north began to seem probable rapidly. when we returned from our journey i wrote a second article, a review of professor cairnes book, published in the westminster review. england is in many uncomfortable ways paying the penalty of the durable resentment that her ruling classes stirred up in the united states by their ostentatious wishes for the ruin of america as a nation; they have reason to be thankful that a few, if only a few, known writers and speakers, standing firmly by the americans in the time of their greatest difficulty, partly diverted these bitter feelings and made great britain not altogether odious to the americans.

this duty having been performed, my principal occupation for the next two years was on subjects not political. the publication of mr. austin's lectures on jurisprudence after his decease, gave me an opportunity of paying a deserved tribute to his memory, and at the same time expressing some thoughts on a subject on which, in my old days of benthamism, i had bestowed much study. but the chief product of those years was the examination of sir william hamilton's philosophy. his lectures, published in 1860 and 1861, i had read towards the end of the latter year, with a half-formed intention of giving an account of them in a review, but i soon found that this would be idle, and that justice could not be done to the subject in less than a volume. i had then to consider whether it would be advisable that i myself should attempt such a performance. on consideration, there seemed to be strong reasons for doing so. i was greatly disappointed with the lectures. i read them, certainly, with no prejudice against sir william hamilton. i had up to that time deferred the study of his notes to reid on account of their unfinished state, but i had not neglected his discussions in philosophy; and though i knew that his general mode of treating the facts of mental philosophy differed from that of which i most approved, yet his vigorous polemic against the later transcendentalists, and his strenuous assertion of some important principles, especially the relativity of human knowledge, gave me many points of sympathy with his opinions, and made me think that genuine psychology had considerably more to gain than to lose by his authority and reputation. his lectures and the dissertations on reid dispelled this illusion: and even the discussions, read by the light which these throw on them, lost much of their value. i found that the points of apparent agreement between his opinions and mine were more verbal than real; that the important philosophical principles which i had thought he recognised, were so explained away by him as to mean little or nothing, or were continually lost sight of, and doctrines entirely inconsistent with them were taught in nearly every part of his philosophical writings. my estimation of him was therefore so far altered, that instead of regarding him as occupying a kind of intermediate position between the two rival philosophies, holding some of the principles of both, and supplying to both powerful weapons of attack and defence, i now looked upon him as one of the pillars, and in this country from his high philosophical reputation the chief pillar, of that one of the two which seemed to me to be erroneous.
examination of hamilton's philosophy this duty having been performed, my principal occupation for the next two years was on subjects not political. the publication of mr austin's lectures on jurisprudence after his decease gave me an opportunity of paying a deserved tribute to his memory, and at the same time expressing some thoughts on a subject on which i had bestowed much study in my old days of benthamism. but the chief product of those years was the examination of sir william hamilton's philosophy. his lectures on metaphysics and logic, posthumously published in 1860 and 1861, i had read towards the end of the latter year with a half-formed intention of giving an account of them in a review, but i soon found that this would be idle and that justice could not be done to the subject in less than a volume. i had then to consider whether it would be advisable that i myself should attempt such a performance. on consideration, there seemed to be strong reasons for doing so. i was greatly disappointed with the lectures. i read them with no prejudice against sir w. hamilton. until then i had deferred the study of his notes to reid's works because of their unfinished state, but i had not neglected his discussions in philosophy... ; and though i knew that his general mode of treating the facts of mental philosophy differed from the one i most approved of, still his vigorous polemic against the later transcendentalists, and his strenuous assertion of some important principles, especially the relativity of human knowledge, gave me many points of sympathy with his opinions and made me think that genuine psychology had more to gain than to lose by his authority and reputation. his lectures and the dissertations on reid dispelled this illusion: and even the discussions in philosophy... , read by the light that these throw on them, lost much of their value. i found that the points of apparent agreement between his opinions and mine were more verbal than real; that the important philosophical principles that i had thought he recognised were explained away by him so as to mean little or nothing, or were continually lost sight of, and doctrines entirely inconsistent with them were taught in nearly every part of his philosophical writings. my estimation of him was therefore so far altered that instead of regarding him as occupying a kind of intermediate position between the two rival philosophies, holding some of the principles of both, and supplying both with powerful weapons of attack and defence, i now looked on him as one of the pillars and in this country, from his high philosophical reputation, the chief pillar of the one that seemed to me to be erroneous.

now, the difference between these two schools of philosophy, that of intuition, and that of experience and association, is not a mere matter of abstract speculation; it is full of practical consequences, and lies at the foundation of all the greatest differences of practical opinion in an age of progress. the practical reformer has continually to demand that changes be made in things which are supported by powerful and widely-spread feelings, or to question the apparent necessity and indefeasibleness of established facts; and it is often an indispensable part of his argument to show, how those powerful feelings had their origin, and how those facts came to seem necessary and indefeasible. there is therefore a natural hostility between him and a philosophy which discourages the explanation of feelings and moral facts by circumstances and association, and prefers to treat them as ultimate elements of human nature; a philosophy which is addicted to holding up favourite doctrines as intuitive truths, and deems intuition to be the voice of nature and of god, speaking with an authority higher than that of our reason. in particular, i have long felt that the prevailing tendency to regard all the marked distinctions of human character as innate, and in the main indelible, and to ignore the irresistible proofs that by far the greater part of those differences, whether between individuals, races, or sexes, are such as not only might but naturally would be produced by differences in circumstances, is one of the chief hindrances to the rational treatment of great social questions, and one of the greatest stumbling blocks to human improvement. this tendency has its source in the intuitional metaphysics which characterized the reaction of the nineteenth century against the eighteenth, and it is a tendency so agreeable to human indolence, as well as to conservative interests generally, that unless attacked at the very root, it is sure to be carried to even a greater length than is really justified by the more moderate forms of the intuitional philosophy. that philosophy not always in its moderate forms, had ruled the thought of europe for the greater part of a century. my father's analysis of the mind, my own logic, and professor bain's great treatise, had attempted to re-introduce a better mode of philosophizing, latterly with quite as much success as could be expected; but i had for some time felt that the mere contrast of the two philosophies was not enough, that there ought to be a hand-to-hand fight between them, that controversial as well as expository writings were needed, and that the time was come when such controversy would be useful. considering, then, the writings and fame of sir w. hamilton as the great fortress of the intuitional philosophy in this country, a fortress the more formidable from the imposing character, and the in many respects great personal merits and mental endowments, of the man, i thought it might be a real service to philosophy to attempt a thorough examination of all his most important doctrines, and an estimate of his general claims to eminence as a philosopher; and i was confirmed in this resolution by observing that in the writings of at least one, and him one of the ablest, of sir w. hamilton's followers, his peculiar doctrines were made the justification of a view of religion which i hold to be profoundly immoral that it is our duty to bow down in worship before a being whose moral attributes are affirmed to be unknowable by us, and to be perhaps extremely different from those which, when we are speaking of our fellow-creatures, we call by the same names.
intuition versus experience now, the difference between these two schools of philosophy, that of intuition and that of experience and association, is not a mere matter of abstract theory; it is full of practical consequences, and lies at the foundation of all the greatest differences of practical opinion in an age of progress. the practical reformer has continually to demand that changes be made in things that are supported by powerful and widely-spread feelings, or to question the apparently necessary and unchallengeable nature of established facts; and his argument often requires him to show how those powerful feelings had their origin, and how those facts came to seem necessary and unchallengeable. so there is a natural hostility between him and a philosophy which discourages the explanation of feelings and moral facts by circumstances and association, and prefers to treat them as ultimate elements of human nature; a philosophy that is dedicated to holding up favourite doctrines as intuitive truths, and regards intuition as the voice of nature and of god, speaking with an authority higher than that of our reason. in particular, i have long felt that one of the chief hindrances to the rational treatment of great social questions, and one of the greatest stumbling blocks to human improvement, is the prevailing tendency to regard all the marked distinctions of human character as innate and mainly indelible, and to ignore the irresistible proofs that by far the greater part of those differences whether between individuals, races, or sexes are such as not only could but naturally would be produced by differences in circumstances. this tendency has its source in the intuitional metaphysics that characterised the reaction of the 19th century against the 18th, and it is a tendency so agreeable to human indolence as well as to conservative interests generally that unless it is attacked at the very root it is sure to be carried to even a greater length than is really justified by the more moderate forms of the intuitional philosophy. that philosophy, not always in its moderate forms, had ruled the thought of europe for the greater part of a century. my father's analysis of the mind, my own logic, and professor bain's great treatise had tried to re-introduce a better mode of philosophising, recently with quite as much success as could be expected; but i had for some time felt that the mere contrast of the two philosophies was not enough, that there ought to be a hand-to-hand fight between them, that controversial as well as expository writings were needed, and that the time was come when such controversy would be useful. considering then the writings and fame of sir w. hamilton as the great fortress of the intuitional philosophy in this country, a fortress made more formidable by the man's imposing character and his (in many respects) great personal merits and mental endowments, i thought it might be a real service to philosophy to attempt a thorough examination of all his most important doctrines, and an estimate of his general claims to eminence as a philosopher; and i was confirmed in this resolution by observing that in the writings of at least one (and him one of the ablest) of sir w. hamilton's followers his particular doctrines were made the justification of a view of religion that i hold to be profoundly immoral namely that it is our duty to bow down in worship before a being whose moral attributes are affirmed to be unknowable by us, and to be perhaps extremely different from those we call by the same names when speaking of our fellow creatures.

as i advanced in my task, the damage to sir w. hamilton's reputation became greater than i at first expected, through the almost incredible multitude of inconsistencies which showed themselves on comparing different passages with one another. it was my business, however, to show things exactly as they were, and i did not flinch from it. i endeavoured always to treat the philosopher whom i criticized with the most scrupulous fairness; and i knew that he had abundance of disciples and admirers to correct me if i ever unintentionally did him injustice. many of them accordingly have answered me, more or less elaborately, and they have pointed out oversights and misunderstandings, though few in number, and mostly very unimportant in substance. such of those as had (to my knowledge) been pointed out before the publication of the latest edition (at present the third) have been corrected there, and the remainder of the criticisms have been, as far as seemed necessary, replied to. on the whole, the book has done its work: it has shown the weak side of sir william hamilton, and has reduced his too great philosophical reputation within more moderate bounds; and by some of its discussions, as well as by two expository chapters, on the notions of matter and of mind, it has perhaps thrown additional light on some of the disputed questions in the domain of psychology and metaphysics.
as i advanced in my task the damage to sir w. hamilton's reputation became greater than i at first expected, because of the almost incredible multitude of inconsistencies that turned up when different passages were compared with one another. it was my business, however, to show things exactly as they were, and i did not flinch from it. i tried always to treat the philosopher whom i criticised with the most scrupulous fairness; and i knew that he had plenty of disciples and admirers to correct me if i ever unintentionally did him injustice. many of them accordingly have answered me, more or less elaborately; and they have pointed out oversights and misunderstandings, though few in number and mostly unimportant in substance. such of those as had (to my knowledge) been pointed out before the publication of the latest edition (at present the third) have been corrected there, and the remainder of the criticisms have been replied to as far as seemed necessary. on the whole, the book has done its work: it has shown the weak side of sir w. hamilton, and has reduced his too great philosophical reputation within more moderate bounds; and by some of its discussions, as well as by two expository chapters on the notions of matter and of mind, it has perhaps thrown additional light on some of the disputed questions in the domain of psychology and metaphysics.

after the completion of the book on hamilton, i applied myself to a task which a variety of reasons seemed to render specially incumbent upon me; that of giving an account, and forming an estimate, of the doctrines of auguste comte. i had contributed more than any one else to make his speculations known in england, and, in consequence chiefly of what i had said of him in my logic, he had readers and admirers among thoughtful men on this side of the channel at a time when his name had not yet in france emerged from obscurity. so unknown and unappreciated was he at the time when my logic was written and published, that to criticize his weak points might well appear superfluous, while it was a duty to give as much publicity as one could to the important contributions he had made to philosophic thought. at the time, however, at which i have now arrived, this state of affairs had entirely changed. his name, at least, was known almost universally, and the general character of his doctrines very widely. he had taken his place in the estimation both of friends and opponents, as one of the conspicuous figures in the thought of the age. the better parts of his speculations had made great progress in working their way into those minds, which, by their previous culture and tendencies, were fitted to receive them: under cover of those better parts those of a worse character, greatly developed and added to in his later writings, had also made some way, having obtained active and enthusiastic adherents, some of them of no inconsiderable personal merit, in england, france, and other countries. these causes not only made it desirable that some one should undertake the task of sifting what is good from what is bad in m. comte's speculations, but seemed to impose on myself in particular a special obligation to make the attempt. this i accordingly did in two essays, published in successive numbers of the westminster review, and reprinted in a small volume under the title auguste comte and positivism.
evaluating comte after the completion of the book on hamilton i took up a task which various reasons seemed to make specially incumbent on me, namely that of giving an account of the doctrines of auguste comte and forming an estimate of them. i had contributed more than anyone else to making his thought known in england. mainly because of what i had said of him in my logic, he had readers and admirers among thoughtful men on this side of the channel at a time when his name in france had not yet emerged from obscurity. so unknown and unappreciated was he at the time when my logic was written and published that to criticise his weak points might well appear superfluous, while it was a duty to give as much publicity as one could to the important contributions he had made to philosophic thought. however, at the time i am now writing about this state of affairs had entirely changed. the general character of his doctrines was known very widely, and his name was known almost universally. he had taken his place in the estimation both of friends and opponents as one of the conspicuous figures in the thought of the age. the better parts of his theories had made great progress in working their way into minds that were fitted to receive them by their previous culture and tendencies; and under cover of those better parts the worse parts greatly developed and added to in his later writings had also made some way, having obtained active and enthusiastic adherents, some of them of considerable personal merit, in england, france, and other countries. these facts not only made it desirable that someone should undertake the task of sifting what is good from what is bad in m. comte's thought but seemed to impose on myself in particular a special obligation to make the attempt. this i accordingly did in two essays, published in consecutive numbers of the westminster review and reprinted in a small volume under the title auguste comte and positivism.

the writings which i have now mentioned, together with a small number of papers in periodicals which i have not deemed worth preserving, were the whole of the products of my activity as a writer during the years from 1859 to 1865. in the early part of the last-mentioned year, in compliance with a wish frequently expressed to me by working men, i published cheap people's editions of those of my writings which seemed the most likely to find readers among the working classes; viz, principles of political economy, liberty, and representative government. this was a considerable sacrifice of my pecuniary interest, especially as i resigned all idea of deriving profit from the cheap editions, and after ascertaining from my publishers the lowest price which they thought would remunerate them on the usual terms of an equal division of profits, i gave up my half share to enable the price to be fixed still lower. to the credit of messrs. longman they fixed, unasked, a certain number of years after which the copyright and stereotype plates were to revert to me, and a certain number of copies after the sale of which i should receive half of any further profit. this number of copies (which in the case of the political economy was 10,000) has for some time been exceeded, and the people's editions have begun to yield me a small but unexpected pecuniary return, though very far from an equivalent for the diminution of profit from the library editions.
cheap editions of my writings the writings i have now mentioned, together with a small number of papers in periodicals that i have not deemed worth preserving, were the whole of the products of my activity as a writer during the years from 1859 to 1865. in the early part of 1865, in compliance with a wish frequently expressed to me by working men, i published cheap people's editions of those of my writings that seemed the most likely to find readers among the working classes, namely principles of political economy, liberty, and representative government. this was a considerable monetary sacrifice, especially as i resigned all idea of deriving profit from the cheap editions: after ascertaining from my publishers the lowest price that they thought would remunerate them on the usual terms of an equal division of profits, i gave up my half-share to enable the price to be fixed still lower. to the credit of messrs. longman they fixed, unasked, a certain number of years after which the copyright and printer's plates were to revert to me, and a certain number of copies after the sale of which i would receive half of any further profit. this number of copies (which in the case of the political economy was 10,000) has for some time been exceeded, so that the people's editions have begun to yield me a small but unexpected monetary return, though far from an equivalent for the loss of profit from the library editions. offers of membership of parliament

in this summary of my outward life i have now arrived at the period at which my tranquil and retired existence as a writer of books was to be exchanged for the less congenial occupation of a member of the house of commons. the proposal made to me, early in 1865, by some electors of westminster, did not present the idea to me for the first time. it was not even the first offer i had received, for, more than ten years previous, in consequence of my opinions on the irish land question, mr. lucas and mr. duffy, in the name of the popular party in ireland, offered to bring me into parliament for an irish county, which they could easily have done: but the incompatibility of a seat in parliament with the office i then held in the india house, precluded even consideration of the proposal. after i had quitted the india house, several of my friends would gladly have seen me a member of parliament; but there seemed no probability that the idea would ever take any practical shape. i was convinced that no numerous or influential portion of any electoral body, really wished to be represented by a person of my opinions; and that one who possessed no local connection or popularity, and who did not choose to stand as the mere organ of a party had small chance of being elected anywhere unless through the expenditure of money. now it was, and is, my fixed conviction, that a candidate ought not to incur one farthing of expense for undertaking a public duty. such of the lawful expenses of an election as have no special reference to any particular candidate, ought to be borne as a public charge, either by the state or by the locality. what has to be done by the supporters of each candidate in order to bring his claims properly before the constituency, should be done by unpaid agency or by voluntary subscription. if members of the electoral body, or others, are willing to subscribe money of their own for the purpose of bringing, by lawful means, into parliament some one who they think would be useful there, no one is entitled to object: but that the expense, or any part of it, should fall on the candidate, is fundamentally wrong; because it amounts in reality to buying his seat. even on the most favourable supposition as to the mode in which the money is expended, there is a legitimate suspicion that any one who gives money for leave to undertake a public trust, has other than public ends to promote by it; and (a consideration of the greatest importance) the cost of elections, when borne by the candidates, deprives the nation of the services, as members of parliament, of all who cannot or will not afford to incur a heavy expense. i do not say that, so long as there is scarcely a chance for an independent candidate to come into parliament without complying with this vicious practice, it must always be morally wrong in him to spend money, provided that no part of it is either directly or indirectly employed in corruption. but, to justify it, he ought to be very certain that he can be of more use to his country as a member of parliament than in any other mode which is open to him; and this assurance, in my own case, i did not feel. it was by no means clear to me that i could do more to advance the public objects which had a claim on my exertions, from the benches of the house of commons, than from the simple position of a writer. i felt, therefore, that i ought not to seek election to parliament, much less to expend any money in procuring it.
in this summary of my outward life i have now arrived at the time when my tranquil and retired existence as a writer of books was to be exchanged for the less congenial occupation of a member of the house of commons. the proposal made to me early in 1865 by some electors in westminster did not present the idea to me for the first time. it was not even the first offer i had received, for more than ten years earlier my opinions on the irish land question led mr lucas and mr duffy to offer, in the name of the popular party in ireland, to bring me into parliament for an irish county, which they could easily have done; but the incompatibility of a seat in parliament with the office i then held in the india house precluded even consideration of the proposal. after i left the india house several of my friends would gladly have seen me a member of parliament, but it seemed unlikely that the idea would ever take practical shape. i was convinced that no numerous or influential portion of any electoral body really wanted to be represented by a person with my opinions, and that someone who had no local connection or popularity, and who did not choose to stand as the mere organ of a party, had little chance of being elected anywhere except through the expenditure of money. now it was and still is my fixed conviction that a candidate ought not to incur one farthing of expense for undertaking a public duty. lawful expenses of an election that have no special reference to any particular candidate ought to be borne as a public charge by the state or by the locality. what the supporters of each candidate must do in order to bring his claims properly before the constituency should be done by unpaid agency or by voluntary subscription. if members of the electoral body or others are willing to subscribe money of their own for the purpose of bringing into parliament (by lawful means) someone who they think would be useful there, no-one is entitled to object; but that any part of the expense should be borne by the candidate is fundamentally wrong, because it amounts in reality to buying his seat. even on the most favourable supposition about how the money is expended, there is a legitimate suspicion that anyone who gives money for leave to undertake a public trust has other than public ends to promote by it; and (a consideration of the greatest importance) when the cost of elections is borne by the candidates, that deprives the nation of the services in parliament of all who cannot or will not afford to incur a heavy expense. if an independent candidate has almost no chance to come into parliament without complying with this vicious practice, it isn't always morally wrong for him to spend money to support his candidacy, provided that no part of it is directly or indirectly employed in corruption. but to justify this he ought to be very certain that he can be of more use to his country as a member of parliament than in any other way that is open to him; and this assurance, in my own case, i did not feel. it was by no means clear to me that i could do more from the benches of the house of commons than from the simple position of a writer to advance the public objectives that had a claim on my exertions. so i felt that i ought not to seek election to parliament, much less to spend any money in procuring it. election to parliament

but the conditions of the question were considerably altered when a body of electors sought me out, and spontaneously offered to bring me forward as their candidate. if it should appear, on explanation, that they persisted in this wish, knowing my opinions, and accepting the only conditions on which i could conscientiously serve, it was questionable whether this was not one of those calls upon a member of the community by his fellow-citizens, which he was scarcely justified in rejecting. i therefore put their disposition to the proof by one of the frankest explanations ever tendered, i should think, to an electoral body by a candidate. i wrote, in reply to the offer, a letter for publication, saying that i had no personal wish to be a member of parliament, that i thought a candidate ought neither to canvass nor to incur any expense, and that i could not consent to do either. i said further, that if elected, i could not undertake to give any of my time and labour to their local interests. with respect to general politics, i told them without reserve, what i thought on a number of important subjects on which they had asked my opinion: and one of these being the suffrage, i made known to them, among other things, my conviction (as i was bound to do, since i intended, if elected, to act on it), that women were entitled to representation in parliament on the same terms with men. it was the first time, doubtless, that such a doctrine had ever been mentioned to english electors; and the fact that i was elected after proposing it, gave the start to the movement which has since become so vigorous, in favour of women's suffrage. nothing, at the time, appeared more unlikely than that a candidate (if candidate i could be called) whose professions and conduct set so completely at defiance all ordinary notions of electioneering, should nevertheless be elected. a well-known literary man was heard to say that the almighty himself would have no chance of being elected on such a programme. i strictly adhered to it, neither spending money nor canvassing, nor did i take any personal part in the election, until about a week preceding the day of nomination, when i attended a few public meetings to state my principles and give to any questions which the electors might exercise their just right of putting to me for their own guidance; answers as plain and unreserved as my address. on one subject only, my religious opinions, i announced from the beginning that i would answer no questions; a determination which appeared to be completely approved by those who attended the meetings. my frankness on all other subjects on which i was interrogated, evidently did me far more good than my answers, whatever they might be, did harm. among the proofs i received of this, one is too remarkable not to be recorded. in the pamphlet, thoughts on parliamentary reform, i had said, rather bluntly, that the working classes, though differing from those of some other countries, in being ashamed of lying, are yet generally liars. this passage some opponent got printed in a placard, which was handed to me at a meeting, chiefly composed of the working classes, and i was asked whether i had written and published it. i at once answered i did. scarcely were these two words out of my mouth, when vehement applause resounded through the whole meeting. it was evident that the working people were so accustomed to expect equivocation and evasion from those who sought their suffrages, that when they found, instead of that, a direct avowal of what was likely to be disagreeable to them, instead of being affronted, they concluded at once that this was a person whom they could trust. a more striking instance never came under my notice of what, i believe, is the experience of those who best know the working classes, that the most essential of all recommendations to their favour is that of complete straightforwardness; its presence outweighs in their minds very strong objections, while no amount of other qualities will make amends for its apparent absence. the first working man who spoke after the incident i have mentioned (it was mr. odger) said, that the working classes had no desire not to be told of their faults; they wanted friends, not flatterers, and felt under obligation to any one who told them anything in themselves which he sincerely believed to require amendment. and to this the meeting heartily responded.
but the conditions of the question were considerably altered when a group of electors sought me out and spontaneously offered to bring me forward as their candidate. if they still wanted me as their candidate after i had explained my opinions and the only conditions on which i could conscientiously serve, it was questionable whether this was not one of those calls on a member of the community by his fellow-citizens that he was scarcely justified in rejecting. so i put their disposition to the proof by one of the frankest explanations ever presented, i should think, to an electoral body by a candidate. in reply to their offer i wrote a letter for publication, saying that i had no personal wish to be a member of parliament, that i thought a candidate ought neither to canvass nor to incur any expense, and that i could not consent to do either, and that if elected i could not undertake to give any of my time and labour to their local interests. with respect to general politics, i told them without reserve what i thought on a number of important subjects on which they had asked my opinion; and one of these being the suffrage, i made known to them among other things my conviction that women were entitled to representation in parliament on the same terms as men. (i was bound to make this conviction known, because i intended if elected to act on it.) it was no doubt the first time such a doctrine had ever been mentioned to english electors; and the fact that i was elected after proposing it gave the start to the now vigorous movement in favour of women's suffrage. back then nothing appeared more unlikely than the election of a candidate (if i could be called a candidate) whose professions and conduct set so completely at defiance all ordinary notions of electioneering. a well-known literary man, who was also a man of society, was heard to say that the almighty himself would have no chance of being elected on such a programme! i strictly adhered to it, neither spending money nor canvassing, nor did i take any personal part in the election until about a week before the day of nomination, when i attended a few public meetings to state my principles and give to any questions the electors might reasonably put to me for their own guidance, answers as plain and unreserved as my address. on one subject only, my religious opinions, i announced from the beginning that i would answer no questions; a determination that appeared to be completely approved by those who attended the meetings. my frankness on all other subjects on which i was interrogated evidently did me far more good than my answers did harm. among the proofs i received of this, one is too remarkable not to be recorded. in the pamphlet thoughts on parliamentary reform i had said rather bluntly that the working classes, though differing from those of some other countries in being ashamed of lying, are yet generally liars. this passage some opponent got printed on a placard which was handed to me at a meeting, chiefly composed of the working classes, and i was asked whether i had written and published it. i at once answered i did. these two words were scarcely out of my mouth when vigorous applause resounded through the whole meeting. it was evident that the working people were so accustomed to equivocation and evasion from those who sought their votes that when they heard someone instead openly declare something that was likely to be disagreeable to them, instead of being offended they concluded at once that this was a person they could trust. a more striking instance never came under my notice of what (i believe) is the experience of those who best know the working classes, that the most essential of all recommendations to their favour is that of complete straightforwardness; its presence outweighs in their minds very strong objections, while no amount of other qualities will make amends for its apparent absence. the first working man who spoke after the incident i have mentioned (it was mr odger) said that the working classes had no desire not to be told of their faults; they wanted friends, not flatterers, and were obliged to anyone who told them anything in themselves that he sincerely believed to require amendment. the meeting heartily responded.

had i been defeated in the election, i should still have had no reason to regret the contact it had brought me into with large bodies of my countrymen; which not only gave me much new experience, but enabled me to scatter my political opinions rather widely, and, by making me known in many quarters where i had never before been heard of, increased the number of my readers, and the presumable influence of my writings. these latter effects were of course produced in a still greater degree, when, as much to my surprise as to that of any one, i was returned to parliament by a majority of some hundreds over my conservative competitor.
had i been defeated in the election, i would still have had no reason to regret the contact it had brought me into with large bodies of my countrymen. this gave me much new experience, and also enabled me to scatter my political opinions rather widely, and by making me known in many quarters where i had never before been heard of it increased the number of my readers and presumably the influence of my writings. these latter effects were of course produced in a still greater degree when, as much to my surprise as to anyone's, i was elected to parliament by a majority of some hundreds over my conservative competitor.

i was a member of the house during the three sessions of the parliament which passed the reform bill; during which time parliament was necessarily my main occupation, except during the recess. i was a tolerably frequent speaker, sometimes of prepared speeches, sometimes extemporaneously. but my choice of occasions was not such as i should have made if my leading object had been parliamentary influence. when i had gained the ear of the house, which i did by a successful speech on mr. gladstone's reform bill, the idea i proceeded on was that when anything was likely to be as well done, or sufficiently well done, by other people, there was no necessity for me to meddle with it. as i, therefore, in general reserved myself for work which no others were likely to do, a great proportion of my appearances were on points on which the bulk of the liberal party, even the advanced portion of it, either were of a different opinion from mine, or were comparatively indifferent. several of my speeches, especially one against the motion for the abolition of capital punishment, and another in favour of resuming the right of seizing enemies goods in neutral vessels, were opposed to what then was, and probably still is, regarded as the advanced liberal opinion. my advocacy of women's suffrage and of personal representation, were at the time looked upon by many as whims of my own; but the great progress since made by those opinions, and especially the response made from almost all parts of the kingdom to the demand for women's suffrage, fully justified the timeliness of those movements, and have made what was undertaken as a moral and social duty, a personal success. another duty which was particularly incumbent on me as one of the metropolitan members, was the attempt to obtain a municipal government for the metropolis: but on that subject the indifference of the house of commons was such that i found hardly any help or support within its walls. on this subject, however, i was the organ of an active and intelligent body of persons outside, with whom, and not with me, the scheme originated, and who carried on all the agitation on the subject and drew up the bills. my part was to bring in bills already prepared, and to sustain the discussion of them during the short time they were allowed to remain before the house; after having taken an active part in the work of a committee presided over by mr. ayrton, which sat through the greater part of the session of 1866, to take evidence on the subject. the very different position in which the question now stands  may justly be attributed to the preparation which went on during those years, and which produced but little visible effect at the time; but all questions on which there are strong private interests on one side, and only the public good on the other, have a similar period of incubation to go through.
i was a member of the house during the three sessions of the parliament that passed the reform bill; during which time parliament was necessarily my main occupation except during its recess. i was a fairly frequent speaker, sometimes giving prepared speeches and sometimes speaking extemporaneously. but my choice of occasions was not the one i would have made if my leading objective had been parliamentary influence. when i had gained the ear of the house, which i did by a successful speech on mr gladstone's reform bill, i steered by the idea that when anything was likely to be done as well or well enough by other people there was no need for me to meddle with it. this led me in general to reserve myself for work that no others were likely to do; so a great proportion of my appearances were on points on which the bulk of the liberal party even the advanced portion of it had a different opinion from mine or had no strong opinion at all. several of my speeches, especially one against abolishing capital punishment and another in favour of resuming the right to seize enemies goods in neutral vessels, were opposed to what then was (and probably still is) regarded as the advanced liberal opinion. my advocacy of women's suffrage and of personal representation were at the time looked on by many as whims of my own; but the great progress since made by those opinions, and especially the zealous response made from almost all parts of the kingdom to the demand for women's suffrage, fully justified the timeliness of those movements and turned into a personal success something that i undertook as a moral and social duty. another duty that was particularly incumbent on me as one of the london members was the attempt to obtain a municipal government for london; but on that subject the indifference of the house of commons was such that i found hardly any help or support within its walls. on this subject, however, i was speaking for an active and intelligent body of persons outside; the scheme originated with them, not with me, and they carried on all the agitation on the subject and drew up the bills. my part was to bring in bills already prepared, and to sustain the discussion of them during the short time they were allowed to remain before the house. this was after i had taken an active part in the work of a committee presided over by mr ayrton, which sat through most of the session of 1866 to take evidence on the subject. the very different position in which the question now stands (1870) ought to be attributed to the preparation that went on during those years and that produced little visible effect at the time. such a period of incubation has to be gone through by any question on which there are strong private interests on one side and only the public good on the other.

the same idea, that the use of my being in parliament was to do work which others were not able or not willing to do, made me think it my duty to come to the front in defence of advanced liberalism on occasions when the obloquy to be encountered was such as most of the advanced liberals in the house, preferred not to incur. my first vote in the house was in support of an amendment in favour of ireland, moved by an irish member, and for which only five english and scotch votes were given, including my own: the other four were mr. bright, mr. mclaren, mr. t.b. potter, and mr. hadfield. and the second speech i delivered was on the bill to prolong the suspension of the habeas corpus in ireland. in denouncing, on this occasion, the english mode of governing ireland, i did no more than the general opinion of england now admits to have been just; but the anger against fenianism was then in all its freshness; any attack on what fenians attacked was looked upon as an apology for them; and i was so unfavourably received by the house, that more than one of my friends advised me (and my own judgment agreed with the advice) to wait, before speaking again, for the favourable opportunity that would be given by the first great debate on the reform bill. during this silence, many flattered themselves that i had turned out a failure, and that they should not be troubled with me any more. perhaps their uncomplimentary comments may, by the force of reaction, have helped to make my speech on the reform bill the success it was. my position in the house was further improved by a speech in which i insisted on the duty of paying off the national debt before our coal supplies are exhausted, and by an ironical reply to some of the tory leaders who had quoted against me certain passages of my writings, and called me to account for others, especially for one in my considerations on representative government, which said that the conservative party was, by the law of its composition, the stupidest party. they gained nothing by drawing attention to the passage, which up to that time had not excited any notice, but the sobriquet of the stupid party stuck to them for a considerable time afterwards. having now no longer any apprehension of not being listened to, i confined myself, as i have since thought too much, to occasions on which my services seemed specially needed, and abstained more than enough from speaking on the great party questions. with the exception of irish questions, and those which concerned the working classes, a single speech on mr. disraeli's reform bill was nearly all that i contributed to the great decisive debates of the last two of my three sessions.
the same idea that my usefulness in parliament could come from my doing work that others were not able or not willing to do made me think it my duty to come forward in defence of advanced liberalism on occasions when most of the advanced liberals in the house preferred not to incur the hostility that this would bring. my first vote in the house was in support of an amendment in favour of ireland, moved by an irish member and supported by only five english and scotch votes (my own, and those of mr bright, mr mclaren, mr t.b. potter, and mr hadfield). and the second speech i delivered was on the bill to prolong the suspension of habeas corpus in ireland. when in this speech i denounced the english way of governing ireland, i said no more than the general opinion of england now admits to have been just; but the anger against fenianism was then in all its freshness; any attack on what fenians attacked was looked on as a defence of them; and i was so unfavourably received by the house that more than one of my friends advised me (and my own judgment agreed with the advice) not to speak again until the favourable opportunity that would be given by the first great debate on the reform bill. during this silence many enjoyed thinking that i had turned out a failure, and that they wouldn't be troubled with me any more. their uncomplimentary comments may, through the force of reaction to them, have helped to make my speech on the reform bill the success it was. my position in the house was further improved by a speech in which i insisted on the duty of paying off the national debt before our coal supplies are exhausted, and by an ironical reply to some of the tory leaders who had quoted against me certain passages of my writings, and called me to account for others, especially for one in my considerations on representative government saying that the conservative party was by the law of its composition the stupidest party. they gained nothing by drawing attention to the passage, which up to that time had not excited any notice; and the label the stupid party stuck to them for a considerable time afterwards. having now no longer any fear of not being listened to, i confined myself (too much, i now think) to occasions on which my services seemed specially needed, and abstained more than enough from speaking on the great party questions. with the exception of irish questions, and those that concerned the working classes, a single speech on mr disraeli's reform bill was nearly all that i contributed to the great decisive debates of the last two of my three sessions. but i have much satisfaction in looking back to the part i took on the two classes of subjects just mentioned. supporting the working men

i have, however, much satisfaction in looking back to the part i took on the two classes of subjects just mentioned. with regard to the working classes, the chief topic of my speech on mr. gladstone's reform bill was the assertion of their claims to the suffrage. a little later, after the resignation of lord russell's ministry and the succession of a tory government, came the attempt of the working classes to hold a meeting in hyde park, their exclusion by the police, and the breaking down of the park railing by the crowd. though mr. beales and the leaders of the working men had retired under protest before this took place, a scuffle ensued in which many innocent persons were maltreated by the police, and the exasperation of the working men was extreme. they showed a determination to make another attempt at a meeting in the park, to which many of them would probably have come armed; the government made military preparations to resist the attempt, and something very serious seemed impending. at this crisis i really believe that i was the means of preventing much mischief. i had in my place in parliament taken the side of the working men, and strongly censured the conduct of the government. i was invited, with several other radical members, to a conference with the leading members of the council of the reform league; and the task fell chiefly upon myself, of persuading them to give up the hyde park project, and hold their meeting elsewhere. it was not mr. beales and colonel dickson who needed persuading; on the contrary, it was evident that these gentlemen had already exerted their influence in the same direction, thus far without success. it was the working men who held out, and so bent were they on their original scheme, that i was obliged to have recourse to les grands moyens. i told them that a proceeding which would certainly produce a collision with the military, could only be justifiable on two conditions: if the position of affairs had become such that a revolution was desirable, and if they thought themselves able to accomplish one. to this argument, after considerable discussion, they at last yielded: and i was able to inform mr. walpole that their intention was given up. i shall never forget the depth of his relief or the warmth of his expressions of gratitude. after the working men had conceded so much to me, i felt bound to comply with their request that i would attend and speak at their meeting at the agricultural hall; the only meeting called by the reform league which i ever attended. i had always declined being a member of the league, on the avowed ground that i did not agree in its programme of manhood suffrage and the ballot: from the ballot i dissented entirely; and i could not consent to hoist the flag of manhood suffrage, even on the assurance that the exclusion of women was not intended to be implied; since if one goes beyond what can be immediately carried, and professes to take one's stand on a principle, one should go the whole length of the principle. i have entered thus particularly into this matter because my conduct on this occasion gave great displeasure to the tory and tory-liberal press, who have charged me ever since with having shown myself, in the trials of public life, intemperate and passionate. i do not know what they expected from me; but they had reason to be thankful to me if they knew from what i had, in all probability preserved them. and i do not believe it could have been done, at that particular juncture, by any one else. no other person, i believe, had at that moment the necessary influence for restraining the working classes, except mr. gladstone and mr. bright, neither of whom was available: mr. gladstone, for obvious reasons; mr. bright because he was out of town.
with regard to the working classes, the chief topic of my speech on mr gladstone's reform bill was the assertion of their claims to the suffrage. a little later, after the resignation of lord russell's ministry and the succession of a tory government, came the working classes attempt to hold a meeting in hyde park, their exclusion by the police, and the breaking down of the park railing by the crowd. though mr beales and the leaders of the working men had retired under protest before this took place, a scuffle ensued in which many innocent persons were maltreated by the police, and the exasperation of the working men was extreme. they showed a determination to make another attempt at a meeting in the park, to which many of them would probably have come armed; the government made military preparations to resist the attempt, and it seemed that something very serious was about to happen. at this crisis i really believe that i was the means of preventing much harm. in parliament i had taken the side of the working men, and strongly censured the conduct of the government. i was invited, with several other radical members, to a conference with the leading members of the council of the reform league; and it was i, mainly, who persuaded them to give up the hyde park project and hold their meeting elsewhere. it was not mr beales and colonel dickson who needed persuading; on the contrary, it was evident that these gentlemen had already exerted their influence in the same direction, so far without success. it was the working men who held out, and so determined were they to pursue their original scheme that i had to pull out all the stops. i told them this: a proceeding that would certainly produce a collision with the military could be justifiable only if (a) the state of affairs had become such that a revolution was desirable, and (b) they thought themselves able succeed in a revolution. to this argument, after considerable discussion, they at last yielded: and i was able to inform mr walpole that their intention was given up. i shall never forget the depth of his relief or the warmth of his expressions of gratitude. after the working men had conceded so much to me, i felt bound to comply with their request that i would attend and speak at their meeting at the agricultural hall; the only meeting called by the reform league which i ever attended. i had always declined being a member of the league, on the avowed ground that i did not agree in its programme of manhood suffrage and the ballot: from the ballot i dissented entirely; and i could not consent to hoist the flag of manhood suffrage, even on the assurance that the exclusion of women was not intended to be implied; since if one goes beyond what can be immediately carried, and professes to take one's stand on a principle, one should go the whole length of the principle. i report in such detail on this matter because my conduct in it gave great displeasure to the tory and tory-liberal press, who have charged me ever since with having shown myself, in the trials of public life, intemperate and passionate. i do not know what they expected from me; but they had reason to be thankful to me if they knew from what i had in all probability preserved them. and i do not believe it could have been done at that particular juncture by anyone else. no other person, i believe, had at that moment the necessary influence for restraining the working classes, except mr gladstone and mr bright, neither of whom was available: mr gladstone, for obvious reasons; mr bright because he was out of town.

when, some time later, the tory government brought in a bill to prevent public meetings in the parks, i not only spoke strongly in opposition to it, but formed one of a number of advanced liberals, who, aided by the very late period of the session, succeeded in defeating the bill by what is called talking it out. it has not since been renewed.
when, some time later, the tory government brought in a bill to prevent public meetings in the parks, i not only spoke strongly in opposition to it, but formed one of a number of advanced liberals who, aided by the very late period of the session, succeeded in defeating the bill by what is called talking it out. it has not since been renewed.

on irish affairs also i felt bound to take a decided part. i was one of the foremost in the deputation of members of parliament who prevailed on lord derby to spare the life of the condemned fenian insurgent, general burke. the church question was so vigorously handled by the leaders of the party, in the session of 1868, as to require no more from me than an emphatic adhesion: but the land question was by no means in so advanced a position; the superstitions of landlordism had up to that time been little challenged, especially in parliament, and the backward state of the question, so far as concerned the parliamentary mind, was evidenced by the extremely mild measure brought in by lord russell's government in 1866, which nevertheless could not be carried. on that bill i delivered one of my most careful speeches, in which i attempted to lay down some of the principles of the subject, in a manner calculated less to stimulate friends, than to conciliate and convince opponents. the engrossing subject of parliamentary reform prevented either this bill, or one of a similar character brought in by lord derby's government, from being carried through. they never got beyond the second reading. meanwhile the signs of irish disaffection had become much more decided; the demand for complete separation between the two countries had assumed a menacing aspect, and there were few who did not feel that if there was still any chance of reconciling ireland to the british connection, it could only be by the adoption of much more thorough reforms in the territorial and social relations of the country, than had yet been contemplated. the time seemed to me to have come when it would be useful to speak out my whole mind; and the result was my pamphlet england and ireland, which was written in the winter of 1867, and published shortly before the commencement of the session of 1868. the leading features of the pamphlet were, on the one hand, an argument to show the undesirableness, for ireland as well as england, of separation between the countries, and on the other, a proposal for settling the land question by giving to the existing tenants a permanent tenure, at a fixed rent, to be assessed after due inquiry by the state.
land in ireland on irish affairs also i felt bound to take a decided part. i was one of the foremost in the deputation of members of parliament who prevailed on lord derby to spare the life of the condemned fenian insurgent, general burke. the leaders of the party handled the church question so vigorously in the session of 1868 that nothing more was required from me than an emphatic adhesion. but the land question was nowhere near so advanced: the superstitions of landlordism had until then been little challenged, especially in parliament, and the backward state of the question so far as the parliamentary mind was concerned was evidenced by failure to carry the extremely mild measure brought in by lord russell's government in 1866. on that bill i delivered one of my most careful speeches, in which i tried to set out some of the principles of the subject, in a manner calculated less to stimulate friends than to conciliate and convince opponents. the engrossing subject of parliamentary reform prevented this bill and a similar one brought in by lord derby's government from being carried through. they never got beyond the second reading. meanwhile the signs of irish disaffection had become much more decided; the demand for complete separation between the two countries had assumed a menacing aspect, and nearly everyone felt that if there was still any chance of reconciling ireland to the british connection it could only be by subjecting the territorial and social relations of the country to much more thorough reforms than had yet been contemplated. the time seemed to me to have come when it would be useful to speak out my whole mind; and the result was my pamphlet england and ireland, written in the winter of 1867 and published shortly before the start of the parliamentary session of 1868. the leading features of the pamphlet were an argument to show the undesirableness for ireland as well as england of separation between the countries, and a proposal for settling the land question by giving to the existing tenants a permanent tenure, at a fixed rent to be assessed after due inquiry by the state.

the pamphlet was not popular, except in ireland, as i did not expect it to be. but, if no measure short of that which i proposed would do full justice to ireland, or afford a prospect of conciliating the mass of the irish people, the duty of proposing it was imperative; while if, on the other hand, there was any intermediate course which had a claim to a trial, i well knew that to propose something which would be called extreme, was the true way not to impede but to facilitate a more moderate experiment. it is most improbable that a measure conceding so much to the tenantry as mr. gladstone's irish land bill, would have been proposed by a government, or could have been carried through parliament, unless the british public had been led to perceive that a case might be made, and perhaps a party formed, for a measure considerably stronger. it is the character of the british people, or at least of the higher and middle classes who pass muster for the british people, that to induce them to approve of any change, it is necessary that they should look upon it as a middle course: they think every proposal extreme and violent unless they hear of some other proposal going still farther, upon which their antipathy to extreme views may discharge itself. so it proved in the present instance; my proposal was condemned, but any scheme for irish land reform short of mine, came to be thought moderate by comparison. i may observe that the attacks made on my plan usually gave a very incorrect idea of its nature. it was usually discussed as a proposal that the state should buy up the land and become the universal landlord; though in fact it only offered to each individual landlord this as an alternative, if he liked better to sell his estate than to retain it on the new conditions; and i fully anticipated that most landlords would continue to prefer the position of landowners to that of government annuitants, and would retain their existing relation to their tenants, often on more indulgent terms than the full rents on which the compensation to be given them by government would have been based. this and many other explanations i gave in a speech on ireland, in the debate on mr. maguire's resolution, early in the session of 1868. a corrected report of this speech, together with my speech on mr. fortescue's bill, has been published (not by me, but with my permission) in ireland.
except in ireland the pamphlet was not popular, as i did not expect it to be. but there were two justifications for publishing it. (1) if nothing less than what i proposed would do full justice to ireland or give a prospect of conciliating the mass of the irish people, the duty of proposing it was imperative. (2) if on the other hand there was any intermediate course that had a claim to be tried, i knew that to propose something extreme was the true way not to block but to facilitate a more moderate experiment. it is most improbable that a measure conceding so much to the tenantry as mr gladstone's irish land bill did would have been proposed by a government or carried through parliament if the british public had not been led to see that a case might be made and perhaps a party formed for a considerably stronger measure. it is the character of the british people or at least of the higher and middle classes who pass muster for the british people! that they won't approve of any change unless they look on it as a middle course; they think every proposal extreme and violent unless their antipathy to extreme views can be vented on some other proposal that goes still further. so it proved in the present instance; my proposal was condemned, but any scheme of irish land reform short of mine came to be thought moderate by comparison. i may observe that the attacks made on my plan usually gave a very incorrect idea of its nature. it was usually discussed as a proposal that the state should buy up the land and become the universal landlord; though in fact it only offered this to each individual landlord as an alternative, if he preferrred selling his estate to retaining it on the new conditions; and i fully anticipated that most landlords would continue to prefer the position of landowners to that of government annuitants, and would retain their existing relation to their tenants, often on better terms than the full rents on which the compensation to be given them by government would have been based. this and many other explanations i gave in a speech on ireland, in the debate on mr maguire's resolution, early in the session of 1868. a corrected report of this speech, together with my speech on mr fortescue's bill, has been published (not by me, but with my permission) in ireland. seeking justice for negroes in jamaica

another public duty, of a most serious kind, it was my lot to have to perform, both in and out of parliament, during these years. a disturbance in jamaica, provoked in the first instance by injustice, and exaggerated by rage and panic into a premeditated rebellion, had been the motive or excuse for taking hundreds of innocent lives by military violence, or by sentence of what were called courts-martial, continuing for weeks after the brief disturbance had been put down; with many added atrocities of destruction of property logging women as well as men, and a general display of the brutal recklessness which usually prevails when fire and sword are let loose. the perpetrators of those deeds were defended and applauded in england by the same kind of people who had so long upheld negro slavery: and it seemed at first as if the british nation was about to incur the disgrace of letting pass without even a protest, excesses of authority as revolting as any of those for which, when perpetrated by the instruments of other governments, englishmen can hardly find terms sufficient to express their abhorrence. after a short time, however, an indignant feeling was roused: a voluntary association formed itself under the name of the jamaica committee, to take such deliberation and action as the case might admit of, and adhesions poured in from all parts of the country. i was abroad at the time, but i sent in my name to the committee as soon as i heard of it, and took an active part in the proceedings from the time of my return. there was much more at stake than only justice to the negroes, imperative as was that consideration. the question was, whether the british dependencies, and eventually, perhaps, great britain itself, were to be under the government of law, or of military licence; whether the lives and persons of british subjects are at the mercy of any two or three officers however raw and inexperienced or reckless and brutal, whom a panic-stricken governor, or other functionary, may assume the right to constitute into a so-called court-martial. this question could only be decided by an appeal to the tribunals; and such an appeal the committee determined to make. their determination led to a change in the chairmanship of the committee, as the chairman, mr. charles buxton, thought it not unjust indeed, but inexpedient, to prosecute governor eyre and his principal subordinates in a criminal court: but a numerously attended general meeting of the association having decided this point against him, mr. buxton withdrew from the committee, though continuing to work in the cause, and i was, quite unexpectedly on my own part, proposed and elected chairman. it became, in consequence, my duty to represent the committee in the house of commons, sometimes by putting questions to the government, sometimes as the recipient of questions, more or less provocative, addressed by individual members to myself; but especially as speaker in the important debate originated in the session of 1866, by mr. buxton: and the speech i then delivered is that which i should probably select as the best of my speeches in parliament. for more than two years we carried on the combat, trying every avenue legally open to us, to the courts of criminal justice. a bench of magistrates in one of the most tory counties in england dismissed our case: we were more successful before the magistrates at bow street; which gave an opportunity to the lord chief justice of the queen's bench, sir alexander cockburn, for delivering his celebrated charge, which settled the law of the question in favour of liberty, as far as it is in the power of a judge's charge to settle it. there, however, our success ended, for the old bailey grand jury by throwing out our bill prevented the case from coming to trial. it was clear that to bring english functionaries to the bar of a criminal court for abuses of power committed against negroes and mulattoes was not a popular proceeding with the english middle classes. we had, however, redeemed, so far as lay in us, the character of our country, by showing that there was at any rate a body of persons determined to use all the means which the law afforded to obtain justice for the injured. we had elicited from the highest criminal judge in the nation an authoritative declaration that the law was what we maintained it to be; and we had given an emphatic warning to those who might be tempted to similar guilt hereafter, that, though they might escape the actual sentence of a criminal tribunal, they were not safe against being put to some trouble and expense in order to avoid it. colonial governors and other persons in authority, will have a considerable motive to stop short of such extremities in future.
during those years i had to perform another public duty of a most serious kind, both in and out of parliament. a disturbance in jamaica, provoked in the first instance by injustice and exaggerated by rage and panic into a premeditated rebellion, had been the motive or excuse for taking hundreds of innocent lives by military violence or by sentence of so-called courts-martial, continuing for weeks after the brief disturbance had been put down; with many added atrocities of destruction of property, flogging women as well as men, and a general display of the brutal recklessness that usually prevails when fire and sword are let loose. the perpetrators of those deeds were defended and applauded in england by the same kind of people who had so long upheld negro slavery; and it seemed at first as if the british nation was about to incur the disgrace of letting pass without even a protest excesses of authority as revolting as ones that englishmen can hardly find words adequate to express their abhorrence when they perpetrated by agents of other governments. after a short time, however, an indignant feeling was aroused; a voluntary association formed itself under the name of the jamaica committee, to take such deliberation and action as the case might admit of, and adhesions poured in from all parts of the country. i was abroad at the time, but i sent in my name to the committee as soon as i heard of it, and took an active part in the proceedings from the time of my return. there was much more at stake than only justice to the negroes, imperative as that consideration was. the question was whether the british dependencies, and eventually perhaps great britain itself, were to be under the government of law or of military licence; whether the lives and persons of british subjects are at the mercy of any two or three officers however raw and inexperienced, or reckless and brutal whom a panic-stricken governor or other official may assume the right to constitute into a so-called court-martial. this question could be decided only by an appeal to the courts, and the committee decided to make such an appeal. this decision led to a change in the chairmanship of the committee, because the chairman, mr charles buxton, thought it inexpedient (not unjust) to prosecute governor eyre and his principal subordinates in a criminal court: but a numerously attended general meeting of the association having decided this point against him, mr buxton withdrew from the committee, though continuing to work in the cause, and i was to my surprise elected chairman. so it became my duty to represent the committee in the house, sometimes by putting questions to the government, sometimes as the recipient of more or less provocative questions addressed by individual members to myself, but especially as speaker in the important debate that was originated in the session of 1866 by mr buxton. the speech i gave then is the one i would probably select as my best speech in parliament. for more than two years we carried on the combat, trying every avenue to the courts of criminal justice that was legally open to us. a bench of magistrates in one of the most tory counties in england dismissed our case; we were more successful before the magistrates at bow street, which gave an opportunity to the lord chief justice of the queen's bench, sir alexander cockburn, to deliver his celebrated charge that settled the law of the question in favour of liberty, as far as it is in the power of a judge's charge to settle it. but there our success ended, for the old bailey grand jury by throwing out our bill prevented the case from coming to trial. it was clear that to bring english officials to the bar of a criminal court for abuses of power committed against negroes and mulattoes was not a popular proceeding with the english middle classes. but we had done our best to redeem the character of our country by showing that there was at any rate a body of persons determined to use all legal means to obtain justice for the injured. we had elicited from the highest criminal judge in the nation an authoritative declaration that the law was what we maintained it to be; and we had given an emphatic warning to those who might be tempted to similar guilt hereafter that, though they might escape the actual sentence of a criminal tribunal, they were not safe from being put to some trouble and expense to avoid it. colonial governors and other persons in authority will have a considerable motive to stop short of such extremities in future.

as a matter of curiosity i kept some specimens of the abusive letters, almost all of them anonymous, which i received while these proceedings were going on. they are evidence of the sympathy felt with the brutalities in jamaica by the brutal part of the population at home. they graduated from coarse jokes, verbal and pictorial, up to threats of assassination.
as a matter of curiosity i kept some specimens of the abusive letters almost all anonymous which i received while these proceedings were going on. they are evidence of the sympathy felt with the brutalities in jamaica by the brutal part of the population at home. they graduated from coarse jokes, verbal and pictorial, up to threats of assassination.

among other matters of importance in which i took an active part, but which excited little interest in the public, two deserve particular mention. i joined with several other independent liberals in defeating an extradition bill introduced at the very end of the session of 1866, and by which, though surrender avowedly for political offences was not authorized, political refugees, if charged by a foreign government with acts which are necessarily incident to all attempts at insurrection, would have been surrendered to be dealt with by the criminal courts of the government against which they had rebelled: thus making the british government an accomplice in the vengeance of foreign despotisms. the defeat of this proposal led to the appointment of a select committee (in which i was included), to examine and report on the whole subject of extradition treaties; and the result was, that in the extradition act which passed through parliament after i had ceased to be a member, opportunity is given to any one whose extradition is demanded, of being heard before an english court of justice to prove that the offence with which he is charged, is really political. the cause of european freedom has thus been saved from a serious misfortune, and our own country from a great iniquity. the other subject to be mentioned is the fight kept up by a body of advanced liberals in the session of 1868, on the bribery bill of mr. disraeli's government, in which i took a very active part. i had taken counsel with several of those who had applied their minds most carefully to the details of the subject mr. w.d. christie, serjeant pulling, mr. chadwick as well as bestowed much thought of my own, for the purpose of framing such amendments and additional clauses as might make the bill really effective against the numerous modes of corruption, direct and indirect, which might otherwise, as there was much reason to fear, be increased instead of diminished by the reform act. we also aimed at engrafting on the bill, measures for diminishing the mischievous burden of what are called the legitimate expenses of elections. among our many amendments, was that of mr. fawcett for making the returning officer's expenses a charge on the rates, instead of on the candidates; another was the prohibition of paid canvassers, and the limitation of paid agents to one for each candidate; a third was the extension of the precautions and penalties against bribery to municipal elections, which are well known to be not only a preparatory school for bribery at parliamentary elections, but an habitual cover for it. the conservative government, however, when once they had carried the leading provision of their bill (for which i voted and spoke), the transfer of the jurisdiction in elections from the house of commons to the judges, made a determined resistance to all other improvements; and after one of our most important proposals, that of mr. fawcett, had actually obtained a majority, they summoned the strength of their party and threw out the clause in a subsequent stage. the liberal party in the house was greatly dishonoured by the conduct of many of its members in giving no help whatever to this attempt to secure the necessary conditions of an honest representation of the people. with their large majority in the house they could have carried all the amendments, or better ones if they had better to propose. but it was late in the session; members were eager to set about their preparations for the impending general election: and while some (such as sir robert anstruther) honourably remained at their post, though rival candidates were already canvassing their constituency, a much greater number placed their electioneering interests before their public duty. many liberals also looked with indifference on legislation against bribery, thinking that it merely diverted public interest from the ballot, which they considered very mistakenly as i expect it will turn out to be a sufficient, and the only, remedy. from these causes our fight, though kept up with great vigour for several nights, was wholly unsuccessful, and the practices which we sought to render more difficult, prevailed more widely than ever in the first general election held under the new electoral law.
among other matters of importance in which i took an active part, but which excited little interest in the public, two deserve particular mention. i joined with several other independent liberals in defeating an extradition bill introduced at the very end of the session of 1866. by this, though surrender avowedly for political offences was not authorised, if political refugees were charged by a foreign government with acts that are inevitably involved in all attempts at insurrection they would be surrendered to be dealt with by the criminal courts of the government they had rebelled against, thus making the british government an accomplice in the vengeance of foreign despotisms. the defeat of this proposal led to the appointment of a select committee (in which i was included) to examine and report on the whole subject of extradition treaties; and the result was that in the extradition act that passed through parliament after i had ceased to be a member, opportunity is given to anyone whose extradition is demanded of being heard before an english court of justice to prove that the offence with which he is charged is really political. the cause of european freedom has thus been saved from a serious misfortune, and our own country from a great wickedness. the other subject to be mentioned is the fight kept up by a body of advanced liberals in the session of 1868 on the bribery bill of mr disraeli's government a fight in which i took a very active part. i had sought the advice of several of those who had applied their minds most carefully to the details of the subject mr w.d. christie, mr pulling, mr chadwick as well as giving much of my own thought to the matter, for the purpose of formulating amendments and additional clauses that might make the bill really effective against the numerous modes of corruption, direct and indirect, that might otherwise (as there was much reason to fear) be increased instead of diminished by the reform act. we also aimed at grafting onto the bill measures for reducing the mischievous burden of so-called legitimate expenses of elections. among our many amendments were: mr fawcett's, for for making the returning officer's expenses a charge on the rates instead of on the candidates; another for the prohibition of paid canvassers, and the limitation of paid agents to one for each candidate; a third for extending the precautions and penalties against bribery to municipal elections, which are well known to be not only a preparatory school for bribery at parliamentary elections but an habitual cover for it. the conservative government, however, when once they had carried the leading provision of their bill (for which i voted and spoke), namely the transfer of the jurisdiction in elections from the house of commons to the judges, made a determined resistance to all other improvements; and after one of our most important proposals, mr fawcett's, had actually obtained a majority they summoned the strength of their party and threw out the clause at a subsequent stage. the liberal party in the house was greatly dishonoured by the conduct of many of its members in giving no help whatever to this attempt to secure the necessary conditions of an honest representation of the people. with their large majority in the house they could have carried all the amendments, or better ones if they had better to propose. but it was late in the session; members were eager to set about their preparations for the impending general election; and while some (such as sir robert anstruther) honourably remained at their post though rival candidates were already canvassing their constituency, a much greater number placed their electioneering interests before their public duty. many liberals also looked with indifference on legislation against bribery, thinking that it merely diverted public interest from the ballot, which they considered very mistakenly, i think it will turn out to be the only remedy, and a sufficient one. from these causes our fight, though kept up with great vigour for several nights, was wholly unsuccessful; and the practices that we tried to make more difficult prevailed more widely than ever in the first general election held under the new electoral law.

in the general debates on mr. disraeli's reform bill, my participation was limited to the one speech already mentioned; but i made the bill an occasion for bringing the two great improvements which remain to be made in representative government, formally before the house and the nation. one of them was personal, or, as it is called with equal propriety, proportional representation. i brought this under the consideration of the house, by an expository and argumentative speech on mr. hare's plan; and subsequently i was active in support of the very imperfect substitute for that plan, which, in a small number of constituencies, parliament was induced to adopt. this poor makeshift had scarcely any recommendation, except that it was a partial recognition of the evil which it did so little to remedy. as such, however, it was attacked by the same fallacies, and required to be defended on the same principles, as a really good measure; and its adoption in a few parliamentary elections, as well as the subsequent introduction of what is called the cumulative vote in the elections for the london school board, have had the good effect of converting the equal claim of all electors to a proportional share in the representation, from a subject of merely speculative discussion, into a question of practical politics, much sooner than would otherwise have been the case.
proportional representation my participation in the general debates on mr disraeli's reform bill was limited to the one speech already mentioned; but i took that opportunity to bring formally before the house and the nation the two great improvements that remain to be made in representative government. one of them was personal representation or as it is called with equal propriety proportional representation. i brought this under the consideration of the house by an expository and argumentative speech on mr hare's plan; and subsequently i was active in support of the very imperfect substitute for that plan that parliament was induced to adopt in a few constituencies. this poor makeshift had scarcely any recommendation except that it was a partial recognition of the evil that it did so little to remedy. as such, however, it was attacked by the same fallacies, and required to be defended on the same principles, as a really good measure; and its adoption in a few parliamentary elections, as well as the subsequent introduction of what is called the cumulative vote in the elections for the london school board, have had the good effect of speeding up the conversion of the equal claim of all electors to a proportional share in the representation from a subject of merely theoretical discussion into a question of practical politics. this assertion of my opinions on personal representation cannot be credited with any considerable or visible amount of practical result.

this assertion of my opinions on personal representation cannot be credited with any considerable or visible amount of practical result. it was otherwise with the other motion which i made in the form of an amendment to the reform bill, and which was by far the most important, perhaps the only really important, public service i performed in the capacity of a member of parliament: a motion to strike out the words which were understood to limit the electoral franchise to males, and thereby to admit to the suffrage all women who, as householders or otherwise, possessed the qualification required of male electors. for women not to make their claim to the suffrage, at the time when the elective franchise was being largely extended, would have been to abjure the claim altogether; and a movement on the subject was begun in 1866, when i presented a petition for the suffrage, signed by a considerable number of distinguished women. but it was as yet uncertain whether the proposal would obtain more than a few stray votes in the house: and when, after a debate in which the speaker's on the contrary side were conspicuous by their feebleness, the votes recorded in favour of the motion amounted to 73 made up by pairs and tellers to above 80 the surprise was general, and the encouragement great: the greater, too, because one of those who voted for the motion was mr. bright, a fact which could only be attributed to the impression made on him by the debate, as he had previously made no secret of his nonconcurrence in the proposal.
votes for women it was otherwise with the other motion that i made in the form of an amendment to the reform bill, and that was by far the most important perhaps the only really important public service i performed as a member of parliament. it was a motion to strike out the words that were understood to limit the electoral franchise to males, and thereby to admit to the suffrage all women who, as householders or otherwise, had the qualification required of male electors. for women not to make their claim to the suffrage at the time when the elective franchise was being largely extended would have been to give up the claim altogether; and a movement on the subject was begun in 1866 when i presented a petition for the suffrage signed by a considerable number of distinguished women. but it was still uncertain whether the proposal would obtain more than a few stray votes in the house; and when, after a debate in which the speakers on the contrary side were conspicuous by their feebleness the votes recorded in favour of the motion amounted to 73 made up by pairs and tellers to above 80 the surprise was general and the encouragement great; all the greater because one of those who voted for the motion was mr bright, which could only be attributed to the impression made on him by the debate, as he had previously made no secret of his disagreement with the proposal. the time appeared to my daughter, miss helen taylor, to have come for forming a society for the extension of the suffrage to women. the existence of the society is due to my daughter's initiative; its constitution was planned entirely by her, and she was the soul of the movement during its first years, though delicate health and superabundant occupation made her decline to be a member of the executive committee. many distinguished members of parliament, professors, and others, and some of the most eminent women the country can boast of, became members of the society, a large proportion either directly or indirectly through my daughter's influence, she having written most and all the best of the letters by which adhesions was obtained, even when those letters bore my signature. in two remarkable instances those of miss nightingale and miss mary carpenter the reluctance to come forward that those ladies had at first felt (not because they disagreed) was overcome by appeals written by my daughter though signed by me. associations for the same object were formed in various local centres, manchester, edinburgh, birmingham, bristol, glasgow, and others that have done much valuable work for the cause. all the societies take the title of branches of the national society for women's suffrage; but each has its own governing body and acts in complete independence of the others. correspondence

i believe i have mentioned all that is worth remembering of my proceedings in the house. but their enumeration, even if complete, would give but an inadequate idea of my occupations during that period, and especially of the time taken up by correspondence. for many years before my election to parliament, i had been continually receiving letters from strangers, mostly addressed to me as a writer on philosophy, and either propounding difficulties or communicating thoughts on subjects connected with logic or political economy. in common, i suppose, with all who are known as political economists, i was a recipient of all the shallow theories and absurd proposals by which people are perpetually endeavouring to show the way to universal wealth and happiness by some artful reorganization of the currency. when there were signs of sufficient intelligence in the writers to make it worth while attempting to put them right, i took the trouble to point out their errors, until the growth of my correspondence made it necessary to dismiss such persons with very brief answers. many, however, of the communications i received were more worthy of attention than these, and in some, oversights of detail were pointed out in my writings, which i was thus enabled to correct. correspondence of this sort naturally multiplied with the multiplication of the subjects on which i wrote, especially those of a metaphysical character. but when i became a member of parliament. i began to receive letters on private grievances and on every imaginable subject that related to any kind of public affairs, however remote from my knowledge or pursuits. it was not my constituents in westminster who laid this burthen on me: they kept with remarkable fidelity to the understanding on which i had consented to serve. i received, indeed, now and then an application from some ingenuous youth to procure for him a small government appointment; but these were few, and how simple and ignorant the writers were, was shown by the fact that the applications came in about equally whichever party was in power. my invariable answer was, that it was contrary to the principles on which i was elected to ask favours of any government. but, on the whole, hardly any part of the country gave me less trouble than my own constituents. the general mass of correspondence, however, swelled into an oppressive burthen.
i believe i have mentioned all that is worth remembering of my proceedings in the house. but listing them, even if i did it completely, would give an inadequate idea of my occupations during that period, and especially of the time taken up by correspondence. for many years before my election to parliament i had been continually receiving letters from strangers, mostly addressed to me as a writer on philosophy, and either propounding difficulties or communicating thoughts on subjects connected with logic or political economy. in common (i suppose) with all who are known as political economists, i was a recipient of all the shallow theories and absurd proposals by which people are perpetually trying to show the way to universal wealth and happiness by some artful reorganisation of the currency. when there were signs of sufficient intelligence in the writers to make it worthwhile attempting to put them right, i took the trouble to point out their errors; until the growth of my correspondence made it necessary to dismiss such persons with very brief answers. but many of the communications i received were more worthy of attention than these, and in some of them oversights of detail were pointed out in my writings, which i was thus enabled to correct. correspondence of this sort naturally multiplied with the multiplication of the subjects on which i wrote, especially those of a metaphysical kind. but when i became a member of parliament i began to receive letters on private grievances and on every imaginable subject that related to any kind of public affairs, however remote from my knowledge or pursuits. it was not my constituents in westminster who laid this burden on me; they kept with remarkable fidelity to the understanding on which i had consented to serve. i did receive an occasional application from some innocent youth to procure for him a small government appointment; but these were few, and how simple and ignorant the writers were was shown by the fact that the applications came in about equally whichever party was in power. my invariable answer was that it was contrary to the principles on which i was elected to ask favours of any government. but on the whole hardly any part of the country gave me less trouble than my own constituents. the general mass of correspondence, however, swelled into an oppressive burden.

while i remained in parliament my work as an author was unavoidably limited to the recess. during that time i wrote (besides the pamphlet on ireland, already mentioned), the essay on plato, published in the edinburgh review, and reprinted in the third volume of dissertations and discussions; and the address which, conformably to custom, i delivered to the university of st. andrew's, whose students had done me the honour of electing me to the office of rector. in this discourse i gave expression to many thoughts and opinions which had been accumulating in me through life, respecting the various studies which belong to a liberal education, their uses and influences, and the mode in which they should be pursued to render their influences most beneficial. the position taken up, vindicating the high educational value alike of the old classic and the new scientific studies, on even stronger grounds than are urged by most of their advocates, and insisting that it is only the stupid inefficiency of the usual teaching which makes those studies be regarded as competitors instead of allies, was, i think, calculated, not only to aid and stimulate the improvement which has happily commenced in the national institutions for higher education, but to diffuse juster ideas than we often find, even in highly educated men, on the conditions of the highest mental cultivation.
while i remained in parliament my work as an author was unavoidably limited to the recess. during that time i wrote (besides the pamphlet on ireland, already mentioned), the essay on plato, published in the edinburgh review and reprinted in the third volume of dissertations and discussions; and the address which, conformably to custom, i delivered to the university of st. andrew's whose students had done me the honour of electing me to the office of rector. in this discourse i gave expression to many thoughts and opinions that had been accumulating in me through life, regarding the various studies that belong to a liberal education, their uses and influences, and how they should be pursued to render their influences most beneficial. the position i took up, vindicating the high educational value of the old classic and the new scientific studies, on even stronger grounds than are urged by most of their advocates, and insisting that it is only the stupid inefficiency of the usual teaching that makes those studies be regarded as competitors instead of allies, was (i think) calculated not only to aid and stimulate the improvement that has happily started in the national institutions for higher education, but also to spread sounder ideas than we often find even in highly educated men regarding the conditions of the highest mental cultivation.

during this period also i commenced (and completed soon after i had left parliament) the performance of a duty to philosophy and to the memory of my father, by preparing and publishing an edition of the analysis of the phenomena of the human mind, with notes bringing up the doctrines of that admirable book to the latest improvements in science and in speculation. this was a joint undertaking: the psychological notes being furnished in about equal proportions by mr. bain and myself, while mr. grote supplied some valuable contributions on points in the history of philosophy incidentally raised, and dr. andrew findlater supplied the deficiencies in the book which had been occasioned by the imperfect philological knowledge of the time when it was written. having been originally published at a time when the current of metaphysical speculation ran in a quite opposite direction to the psychology of experience and association, the analysis had not obtained the amount of immediate success which it deserved, though it had made a deep impression on many individual minds, and had largely contributed, through those minds, to create that more favourable atmosphere for the association psychology of which we now have the benefit. admirably adapted for a class book of the experience metaphysics, it only required to be enriched, and in some cases corrected, by the results of more recent labours in the same school of thought, to stand, as it now does, in company with mr. bain's treatises, at the head of the systematic works on analytic psychology.
during this period also i started (and completed soon after i had left parliament) the performance of a duty to philosophy and to the memory of my father, by preparing and publishing an edition of the analysis of the phenomena of the human mind, with notes bringing up the doctrines of that admirable book to the latest improvements in science and in theorising. this was a joint undertaking: the psychological notes being furnished in about equal proportions by mr bain and myself, while mr grote supplied some valuable contributions on points in the history of philosophy incidentally raised, and dr. andrew findlater made good the deficiencies in the book arising from the imperfect philological knowledge of the time when it was written. having been originally published at a time when the current of metaphysical speculation ran in a quite opposite direction to the psychology of experience and association, the analysis had not obtained as much immediate success as it deserved, though it had made a deep impression on many individual minds, and through those minds had greatly contributed to creating that more favourable atmosphere for the association psychology of which we now have the benefit. admirably adapted for a class book of the experience metaphysics, it only required to be enriched, and in some cases corrected, by the results of more recent labours in the same school of thought, to stand as it now does in company with mr bain's treatises at the head of the systematic works on analytic psychology.

in the autumn of 1868 the parliament which passed the reform act was dissolved, and at the new election for westminster i was thrown out; not to my surprise, nor, i believe, to that of my principal supporters, though in the few days preceding the election they had become more sanguine than before. that i should not have been elected at all would not have required any explanation; what excites curiosity is that i should have been elected the first time, or, having been elected then, should have been defeated afterwards. but the efforts made to defeat me were far greater on the second occasion than on the first. for one thing, the tory government was now struggling for existence, and success in any contest was of more importance to them. then, too, all persons of tory feelings were far more embittered against me individually than on the previous occasion; many who had at first been either favourable or indifferent, were vehemently opposed to my re-election. as i had shown in my political writings that i was aware of the weak points in democratic opinions, some conservatives, it seems, had not been without hopes of finding me an opponent of democracy: as i was able to see the conservative side of the question, they presumed that, like them, i could not see any other side. yet if they had really read my writings, they would have known that after giving full weight to all that appeared to me well grounded in the arguments against democracy, i unhesitatingly decided in its favour, while recommending that it should be accompanied by such institutions as were consistent with its principle and calculated to ward off its inconveniences: one of the chief of these remedies being proportional representation, on which scarcely any of the conservatives gave me any support. some tory expectations appear to have been founded on the approbation i had expressed of plural voting, under certain conditions: and it has been surmised that the suggestion of this sort made in one of the resolutions which mr. disraeli introduced into the house preparatory to his reform bill (a suggestion which meeting with no favour, he did not press), may have been occasioned by what i had written on the point: but if so, it was forgotten that i had made it an express condition that the privilege of a plurality of votes should be annexed to education, not to property, and even so, had approved of it only on the supposition of universal suffrage. how utterly inadmissible such plural voting would be under the suffrage given by the present reform act, is proved, to any who could otherwise doubt it, by the very small weight which the working classes are found to possess in elections, even under the law which gives no more votes to any one elector than to any other.
thrown out of parliament in the autumn of 1868 the parliament that passed the reform act was dissolved, and at the new election for westminster i was thrown out; not to my surprise or (i believe) to that of my principal supporters, though in the few days preceding the election they had become more hopeful than before. if i had not been elected in the first place, that would not have required any explanation; what arouses curiosity is that i was elected the first time, or that having been elected then i was defeated afterwards. but the efforts made to defeat me were far greater on the second occasion than on the first. for one thing, the tory government was now struggling for existence, and success in any contest was of more importance to them. also, all persons of tory feelings were far more embittered against me individually than on the previous occasion; many who had at first been either favourable or indifferent were now vehemently opposed to my re-election. as i had shown in my political writings that i was aware of the weak points in democratic opinions, some conservatives (it seems) had had hopes of finding me an opponent of democracy; because i was able to see the conservative side of the question, they presumed that i, like them, could not see any other side. yet if they had really read my writings they would have known that after giving full weight to all that appeared to me well-grounded in the arguments against democracy, i unhesitatingly decided in its favour, while recommending that it should be accompanied by such institutions as were consistent with its principle and calculated to ward off its drawbacks, one of the chief of these remedies being proportional representation, on which scarcely any of the conservatives gave me any support. some tory expectations seem to have been based on the approval i had expressed of plural voting under certain conditions. mr disraeli made a suggestion of this sort in one of the resolutions that he introduced into the house preparatory to his reform bill (it met with no favour, and he did not press it); and it has been surmised that this arose from what i had written on the point; but if it did, it had been forgotten that i had made it an express condition that the privilege of a plurality of votes should be tied to education, not to property, and even so had approved of it only on the supposition of universal suffrage. how utterly inadmissible such plural voting would be under the suffrage given by the present reform act is proved to any who could otherwise doubt it by the very small weight the working classes are found to possess in elections, even under the law that gives no more votes to any one elector than to any other.

while i thus was far more obnoxious to the tory interest, and to many conservative liberals than i had formerly been, the course i pursued in parliament had by no means been such as to make liberals generally at all enthusiastic in my support. it has already been mentioned, how large a proportion of my prominent appearances had been on questions on which i differed from most of the liberal party, or about which they cared little, and how few occasions there had been on which the line i took was such as could lead them to attach any great value to me as an organ of their opinions. i had moreover done things which had excited, in many minds, a personal prejudice against me. many were offended by what they called the persecution of mr. eyre: and still greater offence was taken at my sending a subscription to the election expenses of mr. bradlaugh. having refused to be at any expense for my own election, and having had all its expenses defrayed by others, i felt under a peculiar obligation to subscribe in my turn where funds were deficient for candidates whose election was desirable. i accordingly sent subscriptions to nearly all the working class candidates, and among others to mr. bradlaugh. he had the support of the working classes; having heard him speak, i knew him to be a man of ability and he had proved that he was the reverse of a demagogue, by placing himself in strong opposition to the prevailing opinion of the democratic party on two such important subjects as malthusianism and personal representation. men of this sort, who, while sharing the democratic feelings of the working classes, judged political questions for themselves, and had courage to assert their individual convictions against popular opposition, were needed, as it seemed to me, in parliament, and i did not think that mr. bradlaugh's anti-religious opinions (even though he had been intemperate in the expression of them) ought to exclude him. in subscribing, however, to his election, i did what would have been highly imprudent if i had been at liberty to consider only the interests of my own re-election; and, as might be expected, the utmost possible use, both fair and unfair, was made of this act of mine to stir up the electors of westminster against me. to these various causes, combined with an unscrupulous use of the usual pecuniary and other influences on the side of my tory competitor, while none were used on my side, it is to be ascribed that i failed at my second election after having succeeded at the first. no sooner was the result of the election known than i received three or four invitations to become a candidate for other constituencies, chiefly counties; but even if success could have been expected, and this without expense, i was not disposed to deny myself the relief of returning to private life. i had no cause to feel humiliated at my rejection by the electors; and if i had, the feeling would have been far outweighed by the numerous expressions of regret which i received from all sorts of persons and places, and in a most marked degree from those members of the liberal party in parliament, with whom i had been accustomed to act.
exasperating the liberal party while i thus was far more obnoxious to the tory interest and to many conservative liberals than i had formerly been, the course i pursued in parliament had not made liberals generally enthusiastic in my support. i have already mentioned how large a proportion of my prominent appearances had been on questions on which i differed from most of the liberal party, or about which they cared little, and how few occasions there had been on which the line i took was such as could lead them to attach any great value to me as a mouthpiece for their opinions. i had moreover done things that had created a personal prejudice against me in many minds. many were offended by what they called the persecution of mr eyre; and still greater offence was taken at my sending a contribution to the election expenses of mr bradlaugh. having refused to be at any expense for my own election, and having had all its expenses defrayed by others, i felt under a special obligation to contribute in turn where funds were deficient for candidates whose election was desirable. i accordingly sent contributions to nearly all the working class candidates, and among others to mr bradlaugh. he had the support of the working classes; having heard him speak, i knew him to be a man of ability and he had proved that he was the reverse of a demagogue by strongly opposing the prevailing opinion of the democratic party on two important subjects malthusianism and personal representation. men of this sort, who shared the democratic feelings of the working classes but judged political questions for themselves and had the courage to assert their individual convictions against popular opposition, seemed to me to be needed in parliament, and i did not think that mr bradlaugh's anti-religious opinions (even though he had expressed them intemperately) ought to exclude him. financially supporting his election would have been highly imprudent if i had been at liberty to consider only the interests of my own re-election; and, as might be expected, the utmost possible use both fair and unfair was made of this act of mine to stir up the electors of westminster against me. these various causes, combined with an unscrupulous use of the usual monetary and other influences on the side of my tory competitor while none were used on my side, explain why i failed at my second election after having succeeded at the first. no sooner was the result of the election known than i received three or four invitations to become a candidate for other constituencies, chiefly counties; but even if success could have been expected, and this without expense, i was not disposed to deny myself the relief of returning to private life. i had no cause to feel humiliated at my rejection by the electors; and if i had, the feeling would have been far outweighed by the numerous expressions of regret which i received from all sorts of persons and places, and in a most marked degree from those members of the liberal party in parliament with whom i had been accustomed to collaborate.

since that time little has occurred which there is need to commemorate in this place. i returned to my old pursuits and to the enjoyment of a country life in the south of europe, alternating twice a year with a residence of some weeks or months in the neighbourhood of london. i have written various articles in periodicals (chiefly in my friend mr. morley's fortnightly review), have made a small number of speeches on public occasions, especially at the meetings of the women's suffrage society, have published the subjection of women, written some years before, with some additions and have commenced the preparation of matter for future books, of which it will be time to speak more particularly if i live to finish them. here, therefore, for the present, this memoir may close.
returning to avignon since that time little has occurred that needs to be recorded here. i returned to my old pursuits and to the enjoyment of a country life in the south of europe, alternating twice a year with a residence of some weeks or months in the neighbourhood of london. i have written various articles in periodicals (chiefly in my friend mr morley's fortnightly review), have made a few speeches on public occasions, especially at the meetings of the women's suffrage society, have published the subjection of women, written some years before, with additions by my daughter and myself, and have started the preparation of matter for future books, of which it will be time to say more in detail if i live to finish them. here, therefore, for the present, this memoir may close.

on iets first publication. her dislike of publicity alone prevented their insertion in the other copies of the work. during the years which intervened between the commencement of my married life and the catastrophe which closed it, the principal occurrences of my outward existence (unless i count as such a first attack of the family disease, and a consequent journey of more than six months for the recovery of health, in italy, sicily, and greece) had reference to my position in the india house. in 1856 i was promoted to the rank of chief of the office in which i had served for upwards of thirty-three years. the appointment, that of examiner of india correspondence, was the highest, next to that of secretary, in the east india company's home service, involving the general superintendence of all the correspondence with the indian governments, except the military, naval, and financial. i held this office as long as it continued to exist, being a little more than two years; after which it pleased parliament, in other words lord palmerston, to put an end to the east india company as a branch of the government of india under the crown, and convert the administration of that country into a thing to be scrambled for by the second and third class of english parliamentary politicians. i was the chief manager of the resistance which the company made to their own political extinction, and to the letters and petitions i wrote for them, and the concluding chapter of my treatise on representative government, i must refer for my opinions on the folly and mischief of this ill-considered change. personally i considered myself a gainer by it, as i had given enough of my life to india, and was not unwilling to retire on the liberal compensation granted. after the change was consummated, lord stanley, the first secretary of state for india, made me the honourable offer of a seat in the council, and the proposal was subsequently renewed by the council itself, on the first occasion of its having to supply a vacancy in its own body. but the conditions of indian government under the new system made me anticipate nothing but useless vexation and waste of effort from any participation in it: and nothing that has since happened has had any tendency to make me regret my refusal. in 1869. the saying of this true hero, after his capture, that he was worth more for hanging than any other purpose, reminds one, by its combination of wit, wisdom, and self-devotion, of sir thomas more. the first was in answer to mr. lowe's reply to mr. bright on the cattle plague bill, and was thought at the time to have helped to get rid of a provision in the government measure which would have given to landholders a second indemnity, after they had already been once indemnified for the loss of some of their cattle by the increased selling price of the remainder. among the most active members of the committee were mr. p.a. taylor, m.p., always faithful and energetic in every assertion of the principles of liberty; mr. goldwin smith, mr. frederic harrison, mr. slack, mr. chamerovzow, mr. shaen, and mr. chesson, the honorary secretary of the association.
a few dedicatory lines acknowledging what the book owed to her were prefixed to some presentation copies of the political economy on its first publication. her dislike of publicity prevented their insertion in the other copies of the work. the saying of this true hero, after his capture, that he was worth more for hanging than for any other purpose reminds one by its combination of wit, wisdom, and self-devotion of sir thomas more. the first was in answer to mr lowe's reply to mr bright on the cattle plague bill, and was thought at the time to have helped to get rid of a provision in the government measure that would have given to landholders a second indemnity, after they had already been once indemnified for the loss of some of their cattle by the increased selling price of the remainder. among the most active members of the committee were mr p.a. taylor, m.p., always faithful and energetic in every assertion of the principles of liberty; mr goldwin smith, mr frederic harrison, mr slack, mr chamerovzow, mr shaen, and mr chesson, the honorary secretary of the association.

